By rmgreeneAs the spring semester starts, NC State email accounts are being targeted with advanced phishing attacks. An average of four phishing attacks per day were reported in 2017. Some recent attacks include the tax payment, tech support and the Gmail update phishing scams. Phishing often comes in the form of emails designed to fool you into releasing sensitive data, such as passwords, account or social security numbers, birth dates, and other identifying information. Phishers have become adept at making emails appear to come from trusted institutions, such as banks, retail stores, package delivery services, or even from friends, family and co-workers.Phishing emails may contain links to harmful URLs or attachments that will download hacking programs or other malicious malware onto your devices. Or a link may take you to an online form that requires you to provide sensitive data, under the premise of unlocking or verifying an account or to claim a prize. Once you click on a link or open an attachment in a phishing email, you have taken the bait.To protect yourself and your data, follow these recommendations:As always, contact the NC State Help Desk at help@ncsu.edu or 919.515.4357 (HELP) with any concerns or questions about suspicious emails, even before you click on any links.For additional information on phishing and computer safety tips, refer to the following resources:Campus Box 7109
Raleigh, NC 27695-7109
No one is immune to phishing attacks, not even you. Targeted phishing attempts are increasing worldwide, even on NC State’s campus. Hackers often use the start of a semester to send specific phishing email to university students and employees to trick them into providing data to validate their accounts in order to attend class, pay bills or change payroll information.You should never click on these (or any) types of phishing email or suspicious links to websites.As demonstrated by recent high-profile incidents, database hacks also bring a great deal of opportunity for phishing attacks. As a target of a phishing attack, you may be asked to “log in to download the list of hacked accounts” or to “log in to see if you’re on it.” Hackers may even attempt to extort money from you. Keep your guard up and never click on these phishing emails or suspicious URLs.If you have created an account on any website that has been breached, you should change the account password immediately. If you use the same password to access other accounts, including your university accounts, change the password on those accounts, too.Remember that no one from the Office of Information Technology (OIT) or any NC State department will send you an email requesting your password or verification of your credentials.For more information on how to protect yourself from phishing scams, see OIT’s Phishing website (http://oit.ncsu.edu/email/phishing). If you receive a questionable email or have any other questions about phishing, contact the NC State Help Desk at help@ncsu.edu or 515-4357 (HELP).Your email address will not be published. All fields are required.Your responseName Email  

Irwin Holmes, NC State's first black graduate and the first varsity athlete to compete at an Atlantic Coast Conference school, will be honored for his perseverance and dedication to the university when the University College Commons is renamed Holmes Hall.Researchers from NC State University have determined the probability of finding a gluon inside the pion. The Abstract talks with them about what this finding means for our understanding of how the universe works.Raleigh, NC 27695 919.515.2011© 2018 NC State University. All rights reserved.

              FILE - In this Saturday, July 30, 2016 file photo, Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton pauses while speaking at a rally in Pittsburgh during a bus tour through the rust belt. In 2016, after repeated attempts to break into various staffers’ hillaryclinton.com email accounts, the hacking group known as Fancy Bear took a new tack, targeting top Clinton lieutenants at their personal Gmail addresses. (AP Photo/Andrew Harnik)
            WASHINGTON (AP) — It was just before noon in Moscow on March 10, 2016, when the first volley of malicious messages hit the Hillary Clinton campaign.The first 29 phishing emails were almost all misfires. Addressed to people who worked for Clinton during her first presidential run, the messages bounced back untouched.Except one.Within nine days, some of the campaign’s most consequential secrets would be in the hackers’ hands, part of a massive operation aimed at vacuuming up millions of messages from thousands of inboxes across the globe.An Associated Press investigation into the digital break-ins that disrupted the U.S. presidential contest has sketched out an anatomy of the hack that led to months of damaging disclosures about the Democratic Party’s nominee. It wasn’t just a few aides that the hackers went after; it was an all-out blitz across the Democratic Party. They tried to compromise Clinton’s inner circle and more than 130 party employees, supporters and contractors.While U.S. intelligence agencies have concluded that Russia was behind the email thefts, the AP drew on forensic data to report Thursday that the hackers known as Fancy Bear were closely aligned with the interests of the Russian government.The AP’s reconstruction— based on a database of 19,000 malicious links recently shared by cybersecurity firm Secureworks — shows how the hackers worked their way around the Clinton campaign’s top-of-the-line digital security to steal chairman John Podesta’s emails in March 2016.It also helps explain how a Russian-linked intermediary could boast to a Trump policy adviser, a month later, that the Kremlin had “thousands of emails” worth of dirt on Clinton.____PHISHING FOR VICTIMSThe rogue messages that first flew across the internet March 10 were dressed up to look like they came from Google, the company that provided the Clinton campaign’s email infrastructure. The messages urged users to boost their security or change their passwords while in fact steering them toward decoy websites designed to collect their credentials.One of the first people targeted was Rahul Sreenivasan, who had worked as a Clinton organizer in Texas in 2008 — his first paid job in politics. Sreenivasan, now a legislative staffer in Austin, was dumbfounded when told by the AP that hackers had tried to break into his 2008 email — an address he said had been dead for nearly a decade.“They probably crawled the internet for this stuff,” he said.Almost everyone else targeted in the initial wave was, like Sreenivasan, a 2008 staffer whose defunct email address had somehow lingered online.But one email made its way to the account of another staffer who’d worked for Clinton in 2008 and joined again in 2016, the AP found. It’s possible the hackers broke in and stole her contacts; the data shows the phishing links sent to her were clicked several times.Secureworks’ data reveals when phishing links were created and indicates whether they were clicked. But it doesn’t show whether people entered their passwords.Within hours of a second volley emailed March 11, the hackers hit pay dirt. All of a sudden, they were sending links aimed at senior Clinton officials’ nonpublic 2016 addresses, including those belonging to longtime Clinton aide Robert Russo and campaign chairman John Podesta.The Clinton campaign was no easy target; several former employees said the organization put particular stress on digital safety.Work emails were protected by two-factor authentication, a technique that uses a second passcode to keep accounts secure. Most messages were deleted after 30 days and staff went through phishing drills. Security awareness even followed the campaigners into the bathroom, where someone put a picture of a toothbrush under the words: “You shouldn’t share your passwords either.”Two-factor authentication may have slowed the hackers, but it didn’t stop them. After repeated attempts to break into various staffers’ hillaryclinton.com accounts, the hackers turned to the personal Gmail addresses. It was there on March 19 that they targeted top Clinton lieutenants — including campaign manager Robby Mook, senior adviser Jake Sullivan and political fixer Philippe Reines.A malicious link was generated for Podesta at 11:28 a.m. Moscow time, the AP found. Documents subsequently published by WikiLeaks show that the rogue email arrived in his inbox six minutes later. The link was clicked twice.Podesta’s messages — at least 50,000 of them — were in the hackers’ hands.___A SERIOUS BREACHThough the heart of the campaign was now compromised, the hacking efforts continued. Three new volleys of malicious messages were generated on the 22nd, 23rd and 25th of March, targeting communications director Jennifer Palmieri and Clinton confidante Huma Abedin, among others.The torrent of phishing emails caught the attention of the FBI, which had spent the previous six months urging the Democratic National Committee in Washington to raise its shield against suspected Russian hacking. In late March, FBI agents paid a visit to Clinton’s Brooklyn headquarters, where they were received warily, given the agency’s investigation into the candidate’s use of a private email server while secretary of state.The phishing messages also caught the attention of Secureworks, a subsidiary of Dell Technologies, which had been following Fancy Bear, whom Secureworks codenamed Iron Twilight.Fancy Bear had made a critical mistake.It fumbled a setting in the Bitly link-shortening service that it was using to sneak its emails past Google’s spam filter. The blunder exposed whom they were targeting.It was late March when Secureworks discovered the hackers were going after Democrats.“As soon as we started seeing some of those hillaryclinton.com email addresses coming through, the DNC email addresses, we realized it’s going to be an interesting twist to this,” said Rafe Pilling, a senior security researcher with Secureworks.By early April Fancy Bear was getting increasingly aggressive, the AP found. More than 60 bogus emails were prepared for Clinton campaign and DNC staffers on April 6 alone, and the hackers began hunting for Democrats beyond New York and Washington, targeting the digital communications director for Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Wolf and a deputy director in the office of Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel.The group’s hackers seemed particularly interested in Democratic officials working on voter registration issues: Pratt Wiley, the DNC’s then-director of voter protection, had been targeted as far back as October 2015 and the hackers tried to pry open his inbox as many as 15 times over six months.Employees at several organizations connected to the Democrats were targeted, including the Clinton Foundation, the Center for American Progress, technology provider NGP VAN, campaign strategy firm 270 Strategies, and partisan news outlet Shareblue Media.As the hacking intensified, other elements swung into place. On April 12, 2016, someone paid $37 worth of bitcoin to the Romanian web hosting company THCServers.com to reserve a website called Electionleaks.com, according to transaction records obtained by AP. A botched registration meant the site never got off the ground, but the records show THC received a nearly identical payment a week later to create DCLeaks.com.By the second half of April, the DNC’s senior leadership was beginning to realize something was amiss. One DNC consultant, Alexandra Chalupa, received an April 20 warning from Yahoo saying her account was under threat from state-sponsored hackers, according to a screengrab she circulated among colleagues.The Trump campaign had gotten a whiff of Clinton email hacking, too. According to recently unsealed court documents, former Trump foreign policy adviser George Papadopoulos said that it was at an April 26 meeting at a London hotel that he was told by a professor closely connected to the Russian government that the Kremlin had obtained compromising information about Clinton.“They have dirt on her,” Papadopoulos said he was told. “They have thousands of emails.”A few days later, Amy Dacey, then the DNC chief executive, got an urgent call.There’d been a serious breach at the DNC.___‘DON’T EVEN TALK TO YOUR DOG ABOUT IT’It was 4 p.m. on Friday June 10 when some 100 staffers filed into the Democratic National Committee’s main conference room for a mandatory, all-hands meeting.“What I am about to tell you cannot leave this room,” DNC chief operating officer Lindsey Reynolds told the assembled crowd, according to two people there at the time.Everyone needed to turn in their laptops immediately; there would be no last-minute emails; no downloading documents and no exceptions. Reynolds insisted on total secrecy.“Don’t even talk to your dog about it,” she was quoted as saying.Reynolds didn’t return messages seeking comment.Two days later, as the cybersecurity firm that was brought in to clean out the DNC’s computers finished its work, WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange told a British Sunday television show that emails related to Clinton were “pending publication.”“WikiLeaks has a very good year ahead,” he said.On Tuesday, June 14, the Democrats went public with the allegation that their computers had been compromised by Russian state-backed hackers, including Fancy Bear.Shortly after noon the next day, William Bastone, the editor-in-chief of investigative news site The Smoking Gun, got an email bearing a small cache of documents marked “CONFIDENTIAL.”“Hi,” the message said. “This is Guccifer 2.0 and this is me who hacked Democratic National Committee.”___‘CAN IT INFLUENCE THE ELECTION?’Guccifer 2.0 acted as a kind of master of ceremonies during the summer of leaks, proclaiming that the DNC’s stolen documents were in WikiLeaks’ hands, publishing a selection of the material himself and constantly chatting up journalists over Twitter in a bid to keep the story in the press.He appeared particularly excited to hear on June 24 that his leaks had sparked a lawsuit against the DNC by disgruntled supporters of Clinton rival Bernie Sanders.“Can it influence the election in any how?” he asked a journalist with Russia’s Sputnik News, in uneven English.Later that month Guccifer 2.0 began directing reporters to the newly launched DCLeaks site, which was also dribbling out stolen material on Democrats. When WikiLeaks joined the fray on July 22 with its own disclosures the leaks metastasized into a crisis, triggering intraparty feuding that forced the resignation of the DNC’s chairwoman and drew angry protests at the Democratic National Convention.Guccifer 2.0, WikiLeaks and DCLeaks ultimately published more than 150,000 emails stolen from more than a dozen Democrats, according to an AP count.The AP has since found that each of one of those Democrats had previously been targeted by Fancy Bear, either at their personal Gmail addresses or via the DNC, a finding established by running targets’ emails against the Secureworks’ list.All three leak-branded sites have distanced themselves from Moscow. DCLeaks claimed to be run by American hacktivists. WikiLeaks said Russia wasn’t its source. Guccifer 2.0 claimed to be Romanian.But there were signs of dishonesty from the start. The first document Guccifer 2.0 published on June 15 came not from the DNC as advertised but from Podesta’s inbox, according to a former DNC official who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the press.The official said the word “CONFIDENTIAL” was not in the original document.Guccifer 2.0 had airbrushed it to catch reporters’ attention.___‘PLEASE GOD, DON’T LET IT BE ME’To hear the defeated candidate tell it, there’s no doubt the leaks helped swing the election.“Even if Russian interference made only a marginal difference,” Clinton told an audience at a recent speech at Stanford University, “this election was won at the margins, in the Electoral College.”It’s clear Clinton’s campaign was profoundly destabilized by the sudden exposures that regularly radiated from every hacked inbox. It wasn’t just her arch-sounding speeches to Wall Street executives or the exposure of political machinations but also the brutal stripping of so many staffers’ privacy.“It felt like your friend had just been robbed, but it wasn’t just one friend, it was all your friends at the same time by the same criminal,” said Jesse Ferguson, a former Clinton spokesman.An atmosphere of dread settled over the Democrats as the disclosures continued.One staffer described walking through the DNC’s office in Washington to find employees scrolling through articles about Putin and Russia. Another said she began looking over her shoulder when returning from Clinton headquarters in Brooklyn after sundown. Some feared they were being watched; a car break-in, a strange woman found lurking in a backyard late at night and even a snake spotted on the grounds of the DNC all fed an undercurrent of fear.Even those who hadn’t worked at Democratic organizations for years were anxious. Brent Kimmel, a former technologist at the DNC, remembers watching the leaks stream out and thinking: “Please God, don’t let it be me.”___‘MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN’On Oct. 7, it was Podesta.The day began badly, with Clinton’s phone buzzing with crank messages after its number was exposed in a leak from the day before. The number had to be changed immediately; a former campaign official said that Abedin, Clinton’s confidante, had to call staffers one at a time with Clinton’s new contact information because no one dared put it in an email.The same afternoon, just as the American electorate was digesting a lewd audio tape of Trump boasting about sexually assaulting women, WikiLeaks began publishing the emails stolen from Podesta.The publications sparked a media stampede as they were doled out one batch at a time, with many news organizations tasking reporters with scrolling through the thousands of emails being released in tranches. At the AP alone, as many as 30 journalists were assigned, at various times, to go through the material.Guccifer 2.0 told one reporter he was thrilled that WikiLeaks had finally followed through.“Together with Assange we’ll make america great again,” he wrote.___Donn reported from Plymouth, Massachusetts. Desmond Butler, Ted Bridis, Julie Pace and Ken Thomas in Washington, Justin Myers in Chicago, Frank Bajak in Houston, Lori Hinnant in Paris, Maggie Michael in Cairo, Erika Kinetz in Shanghai and Vadim Ghirda in Bucharest, Romania contributed to this report.___Editor’s Note: Satter’s father, David Satter, is an author and Russia specialist who has been critical of the Russian government. Several of his emails were published last year by hackers and his address is on Secureworks’ list.
By

Shivali Best For Mailonline


Published:
  09:46 EDT, 17 January 2017

 | 
Updated:
  06:18 EDT, 18 January 2017














e-mail







2.4k
shares

 
         430
View  comments


var googletag = googletag || {};
googletag.cmd = googletag.cmd || [];

googletag.cmd.push(function() {
    googletag
        .defineSlot('/' + adverts.config.dfp.networkCode + '/dm.dailymailtvhouse', [638, 92], 'para_top')
        .setTargeting('pos', 'para_top')
        .setCollapseEmptyDiv(true, false)
        .addService(googletag.pubads());
        
    googletag.display('para_top');
});
         430View  commentsGmail is the latest victim of a phishing scam that is even fooling experienced technical users. The scam is being described as one of the most convincing yet, and tricks users into giving their Google login details, allowing the attacker to sift through their messages.Emails containing the rogue attachment can come from people in the recipient's own address book, and attacker can even copy their style of writing, convincingly passing the fake email on to the victim's contacts.Gmail users are being warned of a phishing scam that tricks them into giving up their Google login details, before sifting through their sent messages folder for new victims to pass the email on toEmails can appear to come from people in your address book.The fake email uses image attachments that look like a PDF file.When you click on the attachment, you are directed to phishing pages, disguised as the Google sign-in page.If you enter your details, your Gmail account becomes compromised, allowing the attacker to sift through your sent messages folder and pass on the scam.Even more worryingly, the phishing pages do not seem to trigger Google's HTTPS security warnings, which normally warn users if they land on an unsafe page.The fake email uses image attachments that look like a PDF file.When you click on the attachment, you are directed to phishing pages, disguised as the Google sign-in page.If you enter your details, your Gmail account becomes compromised, allowing the attacker to sift through your sent messages folder and pass on the scam.Even more worryingly, the phishing pages do not seem to trigger Google's HTTPS security warnings, which normally warn users if they land on an unsafe page.The scam was discovered by Mark Maunder, CEO of Wordfence, the security service for WordPress.Mr Maunder said that the scam was so convincing that it even fooled 'experienced technical users.'A commenter on Hacker News, an IT person who's school server suffered an attack described what happened  once they signed in to the fake page:'The attackers log in to your account immediately once they get the credentials, and they use one of your actual attachments, along with one of your actual subject lines, and send it to people in your contact list.'For example, they went into one student's account, pulled an attachment with an athletic team practice schedule, generated the screenshot, and then paired that with a subject line that was tangentially related, and emailed it to the other members of the athletic team.'The attackers signing into your account happens very quickly, experts warn. 'It may be automated or they may have a team standing by to process accounts as they are compromised.The fake email uses image attachments that look like a PDF file. When you click on the attachment, you are directed to phishing pages, disguised as the Google sign-in page (pictured)Writing on Wordfence, Mr Maunder said: 'Once they have access to your account, the attacker also has full access to all your emails including sent and received at this point and may download the whole lot.'Now that they control your email address, they could also compromise a wide variety of other services that you use by using the password reset mechanism including other email accounts, any SaaS services you use and much more.'To avoid being a victim of the scam, Mr Maunder recommends enabling a two-factor authentication, and keeping a look out for the prefix 'data:text/html' in the brower location bar – a sign of a fake web pageTo avoid being a victim of the scam, Mr Maunder recommends enabling a two-factor authentication, and keeping a look out for the prefix 'data:text/html' in the browser location bar – a sign of a fake web page.He said: 'Make sure there is nothing before the host name 'accounts.google.com' other than 'https://' and the lock symbol.'You should also take special note of the green colour and lock symbol that appears on the left. If you can't verify the protocol and verify the hostname, stop and consider what you just clicked on to get to that sign-in page.' Even using this checklist can't guarantee stopping every attack or preventing every breach. But following these steps will make it significantly harder for hackers to succeed. 1) Enable two-factor authentication (2FA). Most major online services, from Amazon to Apple, today support 2FA.When it's set up, the system asks for a login and password just like usual – but then sends a unique numeric code to another device, using text message, email or a specialized app.Without access to that other device, the login is refused. That makes it much harder to hack into someone's account – but users have to enable it themselves.2) Encrypt your internet traffic. A virtual private network (VPN) service encrypts digital communications, making it hard for hackers to intercept them.Everyone should subscribe to a VPN service, some of which are free, and use it whenever connecting a device to a public or unknown Wi-Fi network.3) Tighten up your password security. This is easier than it sounds, and the danger is real: Hackers often steal a login and password from one site and try to use it on others.To make it simple to generate – and remember – long, strong and unique passwords, subscribe to a reputable password manager that suggests strong passwords and stores them in an encrypted file on your own computer.4) Monitor your devices' behind-the-scenes activities. Many computer programs and mobile apps keep running even when they are not actively in use.Most computers, phones and tablets have a built-in activity monitor that lets users see the device's memory use and network traffic in real time.You can see which apps are sending and receiving internet data, for example. If you see something happening that shouldn't be, the activity monitor will also let you close the offending program completely.5) Never open hyperlinks or attachments in any emails that are suspicious.Even when they appear to come from a friend or coworker, use extreme caution – their email address might have been compromised by someone trying to attack you.When in doubt, call the person or company directly to check first – and do so using an official number, never the phone number listed in the email.- Arun Vishwanath, Associate Professor of Communication, University at Buffalo, State University of New York  


      Beaming Meghan and Harry meet thousands of adoring Australians at the Sydney Opera House as royal fans are given their first glimpse of the Duchess of Sussex's tiny baby bump 
    
Published by Associated Newspapers LtdPart of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group

    Sections
  NewsHarvard Admissions Dean Emails ‘Key Points’ of School’s ‘Narrative’ to Alumni Interviewers Ahead of TrialNewsHundreds Gather for Dueling Demonstrations Ahead of Harvard Admissions TrialNewsUC Defends Affirmative Action, Calls for Changes to Admissions ProcessNewsMeet Three of the Lawyers Defending Harvard's Race-Conscious Admissions PoliciesNewsHarvard, Grad Student Union Set to Begin Negotiations MondayNewsHarvard Celebrates Coming Out Day With Rainbow Cake, New Resource Guide for BGLTQ StudentsNewsWhy President Bacow Is Already Prepping for the Next RecessionIn the days after the 2016 presidential election, a group of hackers tied to the Russian government launched a phishing scheme through a fake Harvard email address in an attempt to spread malware to American think tanks and nonprofits.Under the scheme, the hackers laced Kennedy School Professor Pippa Norris’s paper “Why American Elections Are Flawed” with malware and sent it to recipients under a fake email address that appeared to be from Harvard’s Faculty of Arts and Sciences. The phishing campaign, which was first reported in the New York Times, came from a Russian hacking group also involved in the hacking of the Democratic National Committee this summer, according the cybersecurity firm Volexity.According to Volexity, the phishing email sent from the fake Harvard address had the “widest distribution” compared to phishing attempts sent through other organizations, which include the Clinton Foundation and a cloud fax service.Harvard University Information Technology alerted members of FAS on Nov. 10 about the phishing email and warned them not to open unusual emails. In a statement, Doug Gavel, a spokesperson for the Kennedy School, said the school quickly responded to the phishing message. “We were aware of this most recent phishing attempt because a few individuals at HKS received the email (without clicking on the link) and quickly alerted our IT team,” Gavel wrote in an email. Norris said she only learned that her academic work was being used in the phishing emails after she read the story in the Times. Hackers downloaded her paper from an online portal and distributed digital files of containing her essay. “When I asked our security guys, they said, 'Well, there's nothing we can actually do about it,' in the sense that people can obviously download PDFs from wherever they find them and send off false malware,” Norris said. “But in some ways it’s not actually a security issue at the Kennedy School.”While the phishing may not pose a cybersecurity threat, Norris said she was concerned about the effect the scam will have on the Electoral Integrity Project, a research study examining “international standards of electoral integrity” and the potential fallout of failed elections. Norris serves as director of the project. “It does kind of damage our project because clearly if people feel that our work has been hacked, when I send out genuine emails, how are people going to know that it’s not from somebody else—Dukes or the Russians or whatever?” she said.  This is not the first time a Harvard affiliate has been targeted by hackers recently.  Christian Hamer, HUIT’s chief information security officer, said in 2013 that the University experiences “tens of thousands” of attempted cyber breaches per day. Harvard’s servers—which contain data like students’ social security numbers and academic research—are regular targets.Most recently, Harvard suffered a network intrusion in June, prompting the University to switch to two-step verification for logging into Harvard’s online portals. In order to access websites that require Harvard credentials, school affiliates must now use a secondary device—typically a cell phone—to receive an authentication code, which they can then use to sign onto their accounts. —Staff writer Brandon J. Dixon can be reached at brandon.dixon@thecrimson.com. Follow him on Twitter @BrandonJoDixon.—Staff writer Lucas Ward can be reached at lucas.ward@thecrimson.com.Read more in Faculty NewsThe comprehensive resource for navigating the job search, composing strong resumes and cover letters, performing at interviews, using Harvard’s Campus Interview Program, and profiles from alumni in different industries.With both the iconic and the new, these eight local Boston and Cambridge-area establishments have come to define the Harvard experience for students both old and new.Cryptography and Digital IdentificationMin Jin Lee discusses her motivations and future plans for her trilogy, "The Koreans."Leukolab Quincy, a local cell donation center, is encouraging local communities to become involved in biotech research.
    A filing cabinet broken into in 1972 as part of the Watergate burglary, beside a computer server that Russian hackers breached during the 2016 presidential campaign, both now in the basement of the Democratic National Committee’s headquarters in Washington. Photograph: Justin T Gellerson/The New York Times When special agent Adrian Hawkins of the FBI called the Democratic National Committee in September 2015 to pass along some troubling news about its computer network, he was transferred, naturally, to the help desk. His message was brief, if alarming. At least one computer system belonging to the DNC had been compromised by hackers federal investigators had named “the Dukes”, a cyberespionage team linked to the Russian government. The FBI knew it well: the bureau had spent the last few years trying to kick the Dukes out of the unclassified email systems of the White House, the state department and even the joint chiefs of staff, one of the government’s best-protected networks. Yared Tamene, the tech-support contractor at the DNC who fielded the call, was no expert in cyberattacks. His first moves were to check Google for “the Dukes” and conduct a cursory search of the DNC computer system logs to look for hints of such a cyberintrusion. By his own account, he did not look too hard even after Hawkins called back repeatedly over the next several weeks – in part because he wasn’t certain the caller was a real FBI agent and not an imposter. “I had no way of differentiating the call I just received from a prank call,” Tamene wrote in an internal memo, obtained by the New York Times, that detailed his contact with the FBI. It was the cryptic first sign of a cyberespionage and information-warfare campaign devised to disrupt the 2016 presidential election, the first such attempt by a foreign power in American history. What started as an information-gathering operation, intelligence officials believe, ultimately morphed into an effort to harm one candidate, Hillary Clinton, and tip the election to her opponent, Donald Trump. Like another famous American election scandal, it started with a break-in at the DNC. The first time, 44 years ago at the committee’s old offices in the Watergate complex, the burglars planted listening devices and jimmied a filing cabinet. This time, the burglary was conducted from afar, directed by the Kremlin, with spear-phishing emails and zeros and ones.  Russian president Vladimir Putin and US president Barack Obama on the sidelines of the G20 leaders summit in Hangzhou on September 5th. Photograph: Alexei Druzhinin/AFP/Getty Images An examination by the New York Times of the Russian operation – based on interviews with dozens of players targeted in the attack, intelligence officials who investigated it and Obama administration officials who deliberated over the best response – reveals a series of missed signals, slow responses and a continuing underestimation of the seriousness of the cyberattack. The DNC’s fumbling encounter with the FBI meant the best chance to halt the Russian intrusion was lost. The failure to grasp the scope of the attacks undercut efforts to minimise their impact. And the White House’s reluctance to respond forcefully meant the Russians have not paid a heavy price for their actions, a decision that could prove critical in deterring future cyberattacks. The low-key approach of the FBI meant that Russian hackers could roam freely through the committee’s network for nearly seven months before top DNC officials were alerted to the attack and hired cyberexperts to protect their systems. In the meantime, the hackers moved on to targets outside the DNC, including Clinton’s campaign chairman, John D Podesta, whose private email account was hacked months later.  John Podesta, Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman, on board Clinton’s campaign plane en route to Raleigh, North Carolina, on September 27th. Photograph: Doug Mills/The New York Times Even Podesta, a savvy Washington insider who had written a 2014 report on cyberprivacy for President Barack Obama, did not truly understand the gravity of the hacking. By last summer, Democrats watched in helpless fury as their private emails and confidential documents appeared online day after day – procured by Russian intelligence agents, posted on WikiLeaks and other websites, then eagerly reported on by the American media. Trump gleefully cited many of the purloined emails on the campaign trail. The fallout included the resignations of Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, the chairwoman of the DNC, and most of her top party aides. Leading Democrats were sidelined at the height of the campaign, silenced by revelations of embarrassing emails or consumed by the scramble to deal with the hacking. Though little-noticed by the public, confidential documents taken by the Russian hackers from the DNC’s sister organisation, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, turned up in congressional races in a dozen states, tainting some of them with accusations of scandal. In recent days, a sceptical president-elect, the nation’s intelligence agencies and the two major parties have become embroiled in an extraordinary public dispute over what evidence exists that President Vladimir Putin of Russia moved beyond mere espionage to deliberately try to subvert American democracy and pick the winner of the presidential election. Many of Clinton’s closest aides believe that the Russian assault had a profound impact on the election, while conceding that other factors – Clinton’s weaknesses as a candidate; her private email server; the public statements of FBI director James B Comey about her handling of classified information – were also important. While there’s no way to be certain of the ultimate impact of the hack, this much is clear: a low-cost, high-impact weapon that Russia had test-fired in elections from Ukraine to Europe was trained on the United States, with devastating effectiveness. For Russia, with an enfeebled economy and a nuclear arsenal it cannot use short of all-out war, cyberpower proved the perfect weapon: cheap, hard to see coming, hard to trace. “There shouldn’t be any doubt in anybody’s mind,” Michael Rogers, the director of the National Security Agency and commander of US Cyber Command, said at a post-election conference. “This was not something that was done casually, this was not something that was done by chance, this was not a target that was selected purely arbitrarily,” he said. “This was a conscious effort by a nation-state to attempt to achieve a specific effect.” For the people whose emails were stolen, this new form of political sabotage has left a trail of shock and professional damage. Neera Tanden, president of the Center for American Progress and a key Clinton supporter, recalls walking into the busy Clinton transition offices, humiliated to see her face on television screens as pundits discussed a leaked email in which she had called Clinton’s instincts “suboptimal”. “It was just a sucker punch to the gut every day,” Tanden said. “It was the worst professional experience of my life.” The United States, too, has carried out cyberattacks, and in decades past the CIA tried to subvert foreign elections. But the Russian attack is increasingly understood across the political spectrum as an ominous historic landmark – with one notable exception: Trump has rejected the findings of the intelligence agencies he will soon oversee as “ridiculous”, insisting that the hacker may be American, or Chinese, but that “they have no idea”. Trump cited the reported disagreements between the agencies about whether Putin intended to help elect him. On Tuesday, a Russian government spokesman echoed Trump’s scorn. “This tale of ‘hacks’ resembles a banal brawl between American security officials over spheres of influence,” Maria Zakharova, the spokeswoman for the Russian foreign ministry, wrote on Facebook. Over the weekend, four prominent senators, two Republicans and two Democrats, joined forces to pledge an investigation while pointedly ignoring Trump’s sceptical claims. “Democrats and Republicans must work together, and across the jurisdictional lines of the Congress, to examine these recent incidents thoroughly and devise comprehensive solutions to deter and defend against further cyberattacks,” said senators John McCain, Lindsey Graham, Chuck Schumer and Jack Reed. “This cannot become a partisan issue,” they said. “The stakes are too high for our country.” Sitting in the basement of the Democratic National Committee headquarters, below a wall-size 2012 portrait of a smiling Barack Obama, is a 1960s-era filing cabinet missing the handle on the bottom drawer. Only a framed newspaper story hanging on the wall hints at the importance of this aged piece of office furniture.  The Democratic National Committee headquarters in Washington’s Capitol Hill neighbourhood. Photograph: Justin T Gellerson/The New York Times “GOP Security Aide Among 5 Arrested in Bugging Affair,” reads the headline from the front page of the Washington Post on June 19th, 1972, with the bylines of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein. Andrew Brown (37) the technology director at the DNC, was born after that famous break-in. But as he began to plan for this year’s election cycle, he was well aware that the DNC could become a break-in target again. There were aspirations to ensure that the DNC was well protected against cyberintruders – and then there was the reality, Brown and his bosses at the organisation acknowledged: the DNC was a nonprofit group, dependent on donations, with a fraction of the security budget that a corporation its size would have. “There was never enough money to do everything we needed to do,” Brown said. The DNC had a standard email spam-filtering service, intended to block phishing attacks and malware created to resemble legitimate email. But when Russian hackers started in on the DNC, the committee did not have the most advanced systems in place to track suspicious traffic, internal DNC memos show. Tamene, who reports to Brown and fielded the call from the FBI agent, was not a full-time DNC employee; he works for a Chicago-based contracting firm called The MIS Department. He was left to figure out, largely on his own, how to respond – and even whether the man who had called in to the DNC switchboard was really an FBI agent. “The FBI thinks the DNC has at least one compromised computer on its network and the FBI wanted to know if the DNC is aware, and if so, what the DNC is doing about it,” Tamene wrote in an internal memo about his contacts with the FBI. He added that “the special agent told me to look for a specific type of malware dubbed ‘Dukes’ by the US intelligence community and in cybersecurity circles”. Part of the problem was that Hawkins did not show up in person at the DNC. Nor could he email anyone there, as that risked alerting the hackers that the FBI knew they were in the system. Tamene’s initial scan of the DNC system – using his less-than-optimal tools and incomplete targeting information from the FBI – found nothing. So when Hawkins called repeatedly in October, leaving voice mail messages for Tamene, urging him to call back, “I did not return his calls, as I had nothing to report”, Tamene explained in his memo. In November, Hawkins called with more ominous news. A DNC computer was “calling home, where home meant Russia”, Tamene’s memo says, referring to software sending information to Moscow. “SA Hawkins added that the FBI thinks that this calling home behaviour could be the result of a state-sponsored attack.” Brown knew that Tamene, who declined to comment, was fielding calls from the FBI. But he was tied up on a different problem: evidence suggesting that the campaign of senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Clinton’s main Democratic opponent, had improperly gained access to her campaign data.  Supporters of senator Bernie Sanders’s presidential campaign protest during the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia in July. Photograph: Ruth Fremson/The New York Times Wasserman Schultz, then the DNC’s chairwoman, and Amy Dacey, then its chief executive, said in interviews that neither of them was notified about the early reports that the committee’s system had likely been compromised. Shawn Henry, who once led the FBI’s cyber division and is now president of CrowdStrike Services, the cybersecurity firm retained by the DNC in April, said he was baffled that the FBI did not call a more senior official at the DNC or send an agent in person to the party headquarters to try to force a more vigorous response. “We are not talking about an office that is in the middle of the woods of Montana. We are talking about an office that is half a mile from the FBI office that is getting the notification,” Henry said. The FBI declined to comment on the agency’s handling of the hack. “The FBI takes very seriously any compromise of public and private sector systems,” it said in a statement, adding that agents “will continue to share information” to help targets “safeguard their systems against the actions of persistent cybercriminals”. By March, Tamene and his team had met at least twice in person with the FBI and concluded that Hawkins was really a federal employee. But then the situation took a dire turn. A second team of Russian-affiliated hackers began to target the DNC and other players in the political world, particularly Democrats. Billy Rinehart, a former DNC regional field director who was then working for Hillary Clinton’s campaign, got an odd email warning from Google. “Someone just used your password to try to sign into your Google account,” the March 22nd email said, adding that the sign-in attempt had occurred in Ukraine. “Google stopped this sign-in attempt. You should change your password immediately.” Rinehart was in Hawaii at the time. He remembers checking his email at 4 am for messages from East Coast associates. Without thinking much about the notification, he clicked on the “change password” button and half asleep, as best he can remember, he typed in a new password. What he did not know until months later is that he had just given the Russian hackers access to his email account. Hundreds of similar phishing emails were being sent to American political targets, including an identical email sent on March 19th to Podesta, chairman of the Clinton campaign. Given how many emails Podesta received through this personal email account, several aides also had access to it, and one of them noticed the warning email, sending it to a computer technician to make sure it was legitimate before anyone clicked on the “change password” button. “This is a legitimate email,” Charles Delavan, a Clinton campaign aide, replied to another of Podesta’s aides, who had noticed the alert. “John needs to change his password immediately.” With another click, a decade of emails that Podesta maintained in his Gmail account – a total of about 60,000 – were unlocked for the Russian hackers. Delavan, in an interview, said that his bad advice was a result of a typo: He knew this was a phishing attack, as the campaign was getting dozens of them. He said he had meant to type that it was an “illegitimate” email, an error that he said has plagued him ever since. During this second wave, the hackers also gained access to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and then, through a virtual private network connection, to the main computer network of the DNC. The FBI observed this surge of activity as well, again reaching out to Tamene to warn him. Yet Tamene still saw no reason to be alarmed: He found copies of the phishing emails in the DNC’s spam filter. But he had no reason, he said, to believe that the computer systems had been infiltrated. One bit of progress had finally been made by the middle of April: The DNC, seven months after it had first been warned, finally installed a “robust set of monitoring tools”, Tamene’s internal memo says. The United States had two decades of warning that Russia’s intelligence agencies were trying to break into America’s most sensitive computer networks. But the Russians have always managed to stay a step ahead. Their first major attack was detected on October 7th, 1996, when a computer operator at the Colorado School of Mines discovered some nighttime computer activity he could not explain. The school had a major contract with the navy, and the operator warned his contacts there. But as happened two decades later at the DNC, at first “everyone was unable to connect the dots”, said Thomas Rid, a scholar at King’s College in London who has studied the attack. Investigators gave it a name – Moonlight Maze – and spent two years, often working day and night, tracing how it hopped from the navy to the department of energy to the air force and Nasa. In the end, they concluded that the total number of files stolen, if printed and stacked, would be taller than the Washington Monument. Whole weapons designs were flowing out the door, and it was a first taste of what was to come: an escalating campaign of cyberattacks around the world. But for years, the Russians stayed largely out of the headlines, thanks to the Chinese – who took bigger risks, and often got caught. They stole the designs for the F-35 fighter jet, corporate secrets for rolling steel, even the blueprints for gas pipelines that supply much of the United States. And during the 2008 presidential election cycle, Chinese intelligence hacked into the campaigns of Obama and McCain, making off with internal position papers and communications. But they didn’t publish any of it. The Russians had not gone away, of course. “They were just a lot more stealthy,” said Kevin Mandia, a former air force intelligence officer who spent most of his days fighting off Russian cyberattacks before founding Mandiant, a cybersecurity firm that is now a division of FireEye – and the company the Clinton campaign brought in to secure its own systems. The Russians were also quicker to turn their attacks to political purposes. A 2007 cyberattack on Estonia, a former Soviet republic that had joined Nato, sent a message that Russia could paralyse the country without invading it. The next year cyberattacks were used during Russia’s war with Georgia. But American officials did not imagine that the Russians would dare try those techniques inside the United States. They were largely focused on preventing what former defence secretary Leon Panetta warned was an approaching “cyber Pearl Harbor” – a shutdown of the power grid or cellphone networks. In 2014 and 2015, a Russian hacking group began systematically targeting the state department, the White House and the joint chiefs of staff. “Each time, they eventually met with some form of success,” Michael Sulmeyer, a former cyber expert for the secretary of defence, and Ben Buchanan, now both of the Harvard Cyber Security Project, wrote recently in a soon-to-be published paper for the Carnegie Endowment. The Russians grew stealthier and stealthier, tricking government computers into sending out data while disguising the electronic “command and control” messages that set off alarms for anyone looking for malicious actions. The state department was so crippled that it repeatedly closed its systems to throw out the intruders. At one point, officials traveling to Vienna with secretary of state John Kerry for the Iran nuclear negotiations had to set up commercial Gmail accounts just to communicate with one another and with reporters travelling with them. Obama was briefed regularly on all this, but he made a decision that many in the White House now regret: He did not name Russians publicly, or issue sanctions. There was always a reason: fear of escalating a cyberwar, and concern that the United States needed Russia’s co-operation in negotiations over Syria. “We’d have all these circular meetings,” one senior state department official said, “in which everyone agreed you had to push back at the Russians and push back hard. But it didn’t happen.” So the Russians escalated again breaking into systems not just for espionage, but to publish or broadcast what they found, known as “doxing” in the cyberworld. It was a brazen change in tactics, moving the Russians from espionage to influence operations. In February, 2014 they broadcast an intercepted phone call between Victoria Nuland, the assistant secretary of state who handles Russian affairs and has a contentious relationship with Putin, and Geoffrey Pyatt, the US ambassador to Ukraine. Nuland was heard describing a little-known American effort to broker a deal in Ukraine, then in political turmoil. They were not the only ones on whom the Russians used the steal-and-leak strategy. The Open Society Foundation, run by George Soros, was a major target, and when its documents were released, some turned out to have been altered to make it appear as if the foundation was financing Russian opposition members. Last year, the attacks became more aggressive. Russia hacked a major French television station, frying critical hardware. Around Christmas, it attacked part of the power grid in Ukraine, dropping a portion of the country into darkness, killing back-up generators and taking control of generators. In retrospect, it was a warning shot. The attacks “were not fully integrated military operations,” Sulmeyer said. But they showed an increasing boldness. The day before the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner in April, Dacey, the DNC’s chief executive, was preparing for a night of parties when she got an urgent phone call. With the new monitoring system in place, Tamene had examined administrative logs of the DNC’s computer system and found something very suspicious: an unauthorised person, with administrator-level security status, had gained access to the DNC’s computers. “Not sure it is related to what the FBI has been noticing,” said one internal DNC email sent on April 29th. “The DNC may have been hacked in a serious way this week, with password theft, etc.” No one knew just how bad the breach was – but it was clear that a lot more than a single filing cabinet worth of materials might have been taken. A secret committee was immediately created, including Dacey, Wasserman Schultz, Brown and Michael Sussmann, a former cybercrimes prosecutor at the justice department who now works at Perkins Coie, the Washington law firm that handles DNC political matters. “Three most important questions,” Sussmann wrote to his clients the night the break-in was confirmed. “1) What data was accessed? 2) How was it done? 3) How do we stop it?” Sussmann instructed his clients not to use DNC email because they had just one opportunity to lock the hackers out – an effort that could be foiled if the hackers knew that the DNC was on to them. “You only get one chance to raise the drawbridge,” Sussmann said. “If the adversaries know you are aware of their presence, they will take steps to burrow in, or erase the logs that show they were present.” The DNC immediately hired CrowdStrike, a cybersecurity firm, to scan its computers, identify the intruders and build a new computer and telephone system from scratch. Within a day, CrowdStrike confirmed that the intrusion had originated in Russia, Sussmann said. The work that such companies do is a computer version of old-fashioned crime scene investigation, with fingerprints, bullet casings and DNA swabs replaced by an electronic trail that can be just as incriminating. And just as police detectives learn to identify the telltale methods of a veteran burglar, so CrowdStrike investigators recognised the distinctive handiwork of Cosy Bear and Fancy Bear. Those are CrowdStrike’s nicknames for the two Russian hacking groups that the firm found at work inside the DNC network. Cosy Bear – the group also known as the Dukes or APT 29, for “advanced persistent threat” – may or may not be associated with the FSB, the main successor to the Soviet-era KGB, but it is widely believed to be a Russian government operation. It made its first appearance in 2014, said Dmitri Alperovitch, CrowdStrike’s co-founder and chief technology officer. It was Cosy Bear, CrowdStrike concluded, that first penetrated the DNC in summer 2015, by sending spear-phishing emails to a long list of US government agencies, Washington nonprofits and government contractors. Whenever someone clicked on a phishing message, the Russians would enter the network, “exfiltrate” documents of interest and stockpile them for intelligence purposes. “Once they got into the DNC, they found the data valuable and decided to continue the operation,” said Alperovitch, who was born in Russia and moved to the United States as a teenager. Only in March 2016 did Fancy Bear show up – first penetrating the computers of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and then jumping to the DNC, investigators believe. Fancy Bear, sometimes called APT 28 and believed to be directed by the GRU, Russia’s military intelligence agency, is an older outfit, tracked by western investigators for nearly a decade. It was Fancy Bear that got hold of Podesta’s email. Attribution, as the skill of identifying a cyberattacker is known, is more art than science. It is often impossible to name an attacker with absolute certainty. But over time, by accumulating a reference library of hacking techniques and targets, it is possible to spot repeat offenders. Fancy Bear, for instance, has gone after military and political targets in Ukraine and Georgia, and at Nato installations. That largely rules out cybercriminals and most countries, Alperovitch said. “There’s no plausible actor that has an interest in all those victims other than Russia,” he said. Another clue: the Russian hacking groups tended to be active during working hours in the Moscow time zone. To their astonishment, Alperovitch said, CrowdStrike experts found signs that the two Russian hacking groups had not co-ordinated their attacks. Fancy Bear, apparently not knowing that Cosy Bear had been rummaging in DNC files for months, took many of the same documents. In the six weeks after CrowdStrike’s arrival, in total secrecy, the computer system at the DNC was replaced. For a weekend, email and phones were shut off; employees were told it was a system upgrade. All laptops were turned in and the hard drives wiped clean, with the uninfected information on them imaged to new drives. Though DNC officials had learned that the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee had been infected, too, they did not notify their sister organisation, which was in the same building, because they were afraid that it would leak. All this work took place as the bitter contest for the Democratic nomination continued to play out between Clinton and Sanders, and it was already causing a major distraction for Wasserman Schultz and the DNC’s chief executive. “This was not a bump in the road – bumps in the road happen all the time,” she said in an interview. “Two different Russian spy agencies had hacked into our network and stolen our property. And we did not yet know what they had taken. But we knew they had very broad access to our network. There was a tremendous amount of uncertainty. And it was chilling.” The DNC executives and their lawyer had their first formal meeting with senior FBI officials in mid-June, nine months after the bureau’s first call to the tech-support contractor. Among the early requests at that meeting, according to participants: that the federal government make a quick “attribution” formally blaming actors with ties to Russian government for the attack to make clear that it was not routine hacking but foreign espionage. “You have a presidential election under way here and you know that the Russians have hacked into the DNC,” Sussmann said, recalling the message to the FBI. “We need to tell the American public that. And soon.” In mid-June, on Sussmann’s advice, DNC leaders decided to take a bold step. Concerned that word of the hacking might leak, they decided to go public in the Washington Post with the news that the committee had been attacked. That way, they figured, they could get ahead of the story, win a little sympathy from voters for being victimised by Russian hackers and refocus on the campaign. But the very next day, a new, deeply unsettling shock awaited them. Someone calling himself Guccifer 2.0 appeared on the web, claiming to be the DNC hacker – and he posted a confidential committee document detailing Trump’s record and half a dozen other documents to prove his bona fides. “And it’s just a tiny part of all docs I downloaded from the Democrats networks,” he wrote. Then something more ominous: “The main part of the papers, thousands of files and mails, I gave to WikiLeaks. They will publish them soon.” It was bad enough that Russian hackers had been spying inside the committee’s network for months. Now the public release of documents had turned a conventional espionage operation into something far more menacing: political sabotage, an unpredictable, uncontrollable menace for Democratic campaigns. Guccifer 2.0 borrowed the moniker of an earlier hacker, a Romanian who called himself Guccifer and was jailed for breaking into the personal computers of former President George W Bush, former secretary of state Colin Powell and other notables. This new attacker seemed intent on showing that the DNC’s cyberexperts at CrowdStrike were wrong to blame Russia. Guccifer 2.0 called himself a “lone hacker” and mocked CrowdStrike for calling the attackers “sophisticated”. But online investigators quickly undercut his story. On a whim, Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai, a writer for Motherboard, the tech and culture site of Vice, tried to contact Guccifer 2.0 by direct message on Twitter. “Surprisingly, he answered right away,” Franceschi-Bicchierai said. But whoever was on the other end seemed to be mocking him. “I asked him why he did it, and he said he wanted to expose the Illuminati. He called himself a Gucci lover. And he said he was Romanian.” That gave Franceschi-Bicchierai an idea. Using Google Translate, he sent the purported hacker some questions in Romanian. The answers came back in Romanian. But when he was offline, Franceschi-Bicchierai checked with a couple of native speakers, who told him Guccifer 2.0 had apparently been using Google Translate as well – and was clearly not the Romanian he claimed to be. Cyber researchers found other clues pointing to Russia. Microsoft Word documents posted by Guccifer 2.0 had been edited by someone calling himself, in Russian, Felix Edmundovich – an obvious nom de guerre honouring the founder of the Soviet secret police, Felix Edmundovich Dzerzhinsky. Bad links in the texts were marked by warnings in Russian, generated by what was clearly a Russian-language version of Word. When Franceschi-Bicchierai managed to engage Guccifer 2.0 over a period of weeks, he found that his interlocutor’s tone and manner changed. “At first he was careless and colloquial. Weeks later, he was curt and more calculating,” he said. “It seemed like a group of people, and a very sloppy attempt to cover up.” Computer experts drew the same conclusion about DCLeaks.com, a site that sprang up in June, claiming to be the work of “hacktivists” but posting more stolen documents. It, too, seemed to be a clumsy front for the same Russians who had stolen the documents. Notably, the website was registered in April, suggesting that the Russian hacking team planned well in advance to make public what it stole. In addition to what Guccifer 2.0 published on his site, he provided material directly on request to some bloggers and publications. The steady flow of Guccifer 2.0 documents constantly undercut Democratic messaging efforts. On July 6th, 12 days before the Republican National Convention began in Cleveland, Guccifer released the DNC’s battle plan and budget for countering it. For Republican operatives, it was insider gold. Then WikiLeaks, a far more established outlet, began to publish the hacked material – just as Guccifer 2.0 had promised. On July 22nd, three days before the start of the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia, WikiLeaks dumped out 44,053 DNC emails with 17,761 attachments. Some of the messages made clear that some DNC officials favoired Clinton over her progressive challenger, Sanders. That was no shock; Sanders, after all, had been an independent socialist, not a Democrat, during his long career in Congress, while Clinton had been one of the party’s stars for decades. But the emails, some of them crude or insulting, infuriated Sanders delegates as they arrived in Philadelphia. Wasserman Schultz resigned under pressure on the eve of the convention where she had planned to preside. Trump, by now the Republican nominee, expressed delight at the continuing jolts to his opponent, and he began to use Twitter and his stump speeches to highlight the WikiLeaks releases. On July 25th, he sent out a light-hearted tweet: “The new joke in town,” he wrote, “is that Russia leaked the disastrous DNC e-mails, which should never have been written (stupid), because Putin likes me.”  President-elect Donald Trump walks down the stairs from his plane after returning from Wisconsin to LaGuardia Airport on December 13th.Photograph: Kathy Willens/AP But WikiLeaks was far from finished. On October 7th, a month before the election, the site began the serial publication of thousands of private emails to and from Podesta, Clinton’s campaign manager. The same day, the United States formally accused the Russian government of being behind the hackings, in a joint statement by the director of national intelligence and the department of homeland security, and Trump suffered his worst blow to date, with the release of a recording in which he bragged about sexually assaulting women. The Podesta emails were nowhere near as sensational as the Trump video. But, released by WikiLeaks day after day over the last month of the campaign, they provided material for countless news reports. They disclosed the contents of Clinton’s speeches to large banks, which she had refused to release. They exposed tensions inside the campaign, including disagreements over donations to the Clinton Foundation that staff members thought might look bad for the candidate and Tanden’s complaint that Clinton’s instincts were “suboptimal”. “I was just mortified,” Tanden said in an interview. Her emails were released on the eve of one of the presidential debates, she recalled. “I put my hands over my head and said, ‘I can’t believe this is happening to me.’” Though she had regularly appeared on television to support Clinton, she cancelled her appearances because all the questions were about what she had said in the emails. Tanden, like other Democrats whose messages became public, said it was obvious to her that WikiLeaks was trying its best to damage the Clinton campaign. “If you care about transparency, you put all the emails out at once,” she said. “But they wanted to hurt her. So they put them out 1,800 to 3,000 a day.” The Trump campaign knew in advance about WikiLeaks’s plans. Days before the Podesta email release began, Roger Stone, a Republican operative working with the Trump campaign, sent out an excited tweet about what was coming, saying “Wednesday @HillaryClinton is done #WikiLeaks.” But in an interview, Stone said he had no role in the leaks; he had just heard from an American with ties to WikiLeaks that damning emails were coming. Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder and editor, has resisted the conclusion that his site became a pass-through for Russian hackers working for Putin’s government or that he was deliberately trying to undermine Clinton’s candidacy. But the evidence on both counts appears compelling. In a series of email exchanges, Assange refused to say anything about WikiLeaks’ source for the hacked material. He denied that he had made his animus toward Clinton clear in public statements (“False. But what is this? Junior high?”) or that the site had timed the releases for maximum negative effect on her campaign. “WikiLeaks makes its decisions based on newsworthiness, including for its recent epic scoops,” he wrote. Assange disputed the conclusion of the October 7th statement from the intelligence agencies that the leaks were “intended to interfere with the US election process.” “This is false,” he wrote. “As the disclosing party we know that this was not the intent. Publishers publishing newsworthy information during an election is part of a free election.” But asked whether he believed the leaks were one reason for Trump’s election, Assange seemed happy to take credit. “Americans extensively engaged with our publications,” he wrote. “According to Facebook statistics WikiLeaks was the most referenced political topic during October.” Though Assange did not say so, WikiLeaks’s best defence may be the conduct of the mainstream American media. Every major publication, including the New York Times, published multiple stories citing the DNC and Podesta emails posted by WikiLeaks, becoming a de facto instrument of Russian intelligence. Putin, a student of martial arts, had turned two institutions at the core of American democracy – political campaigns and independent media – to his own ends. The media’s appetite for the hacked material, and its focus on the gossipy content instead of the Russian source, disturbed some of those whose personal emails were being reposted across the web. “What was really surprising to me?” Tanden said. “I could not believe that reporters were covering it.” As the first Situation Room meetings on the Russian hacking began in July, “it was clear that Russia was going to be a much more complicated case”, said one participant. The Russians clearly had a more sophisticated understanding of American politics, and they were masters of “kompromat”, their term for compromising information. But a formal “attribution report” still had not been forwarded to the president. “It took forever,” one senior administration official said, complaining about the pace at which the intelligence assessments moved through the system. In August a group that called itself the “Shadow Brokers” published a set of software tools that looked like what the NSA uses to break into foreign computer networks and install “implants”, malware that can be used for surveillance or attack. The code came from the Tailored Access Operations unit of the NSA, a secretive group that mastered the arts of surveillance and cyberwar. The assumption – still unproved – was that the code was put out in the open by the Russians as a warning: retaliate for the DNC, and there are a lot more secrets, from the hackings of the state department, the White House and the Pentagon, that might be spilled as well. One senior official compared it to the scene in The Godfather where the head of a favourite horse is left in a bed, as a warning. The NSA said nothing. But by late August, Rogers, its director, was pressing for a more muscular response to the Russians. In his role as director of the Pentagon’s Cyber Command, he proposed a series of potential counter-cyberstrikes. While officials will not discuss them in detail, the possible counterstrikes reportedly included operations that would turn the tables on Putin, exposing his financial links to Russia’s oligarchs, and punching holes in the Russian internet to allow dissidents to get their message out. Pentagon officials judged the measures too unsubtle and ordered up their own set of options. But in the end, none of those were formally presented to the president. Instead, when Obama’s national security team reconvened after summer vacation, the focus turned to a crash effort to secure the nation’s voting machines and voter-registration rolls from hacking. The scenario they discussed most frequently – one that turned out not to be an issue – was a narrow vote in favour of Clinton, followed by a declaration by Trump that the vote was “rigged” and more leaks intended to undercut her legitimacy. Donna Brazile, the interim chairwoman of the DNC, became increasingly frustrated as the clock continued to run down on the presidential election – and still there was no broad public condemnation by the White House, or Republican Party leaders – of the attack as an act of foreign espionage. Brazile even reached out to Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, urging him twice in private conversations and in a letter to join her in condemning the attacks – an offer he declined to take up. “We just kept hearing, the government would respond, the government would respond,” she said. “Once upon a time, if a foreign government interfered with our election we would respond as a nation, not as a political party.” But Obama did decide that he would deliver a warning to Putin in person at a Group of 20 summit meeting in Hangzhou, China, the last time they would be in the same place while Obama was still in office. When the two men met for a tense pull-aside, in which White House officials – who were not present for the one-on-one meeting – say Obama explicitly warned Putin of a strong American response if there was continued effort to influence the election or manipulate the vote. Later that day, Obama made a rare reference to the United States’s own offensive cybercapacity, which he has almost never talked about. “Frankly, both offensively and defensively, we have more capacity,” he told reporters. But when it came time to make a public assertion of Russia’s role in early October, it was made in a written statement from the director of national intelligence and the secretary of homeland security. The reference in the statement to hackings on “political organisations,” officials now say, encompassed a hacking on data stored by the Republicans as well. Two senior officials say the forensic evidence was accompanied by “human and technical” sources in Russia, which appears to mean that the United States’s implants or taps in Russian computer and phone networks helped confirm the country’s role. But that may not be known for decades, until the secrets are declassified. A week later vice-president Joe Biden was sent out to transmit a public warning to Putin: the United States will retaliate “at the time of our choosing. And under the circumstances that have the greatest impact.” Later, after Biden said he was not concerned that Russia could “fundamentally alter the election”, he was asked whether the American public would know if the message to Putin had been sent. “Hope not,” Biden responded. Some of his former colleagues think that was the wrong answer. A US counterstrike, said Michael Morell, the former deputy director of the CIA under Obama, has “got to be overt. It needs to be seen.” A covert response would significantly limit the deterrence effect, he added. “If you can’t see it, it’s not going to deter the Chinese and North Koreans and Iranians and others.” The Obama administration says it still has more than 30 days to do exactly that. As the year draws to a close, it now seems possible that there will be multiple investigations of the Russian hacking – the intelligence review Obama has ordered completed by January 20th, the day he leaves office, and one or more congressional inquiries. They will wrestle with, among other things, Putin’s motive. Did he seek to mar the brand of American democracy, to forestall anti-Russian activism for both Russians and their neighbours? Or to weaken the next American president, since presumably Putin had no reason to doubt American forecasts that Clinton would win easily? Or was it, as the CIA concluded last month, a deliberate attempt to elect Trump? In fact, the Russian hack-and-dox scheme accomplished all three goals. What seems clear is that Russian hacking, given its success, is not going to stop. Two weeks ago, the German intelligence chief, Bruno Kahl, warned that Russia might target elections in Germany next year. “The perpetrators have an interest to delegitimise the democratic process as such,” Kahl said. Now, he added, “Europe is in the focus of these attempts of disturbance, and Germany to a particularly great extent.” But Russia has by no means forgotten its American target. On the day after the presidential election, the cybersecurity company Volexity reported five new waves of phishing emails, evidently from Cosy Bear, aimed at think tanks and nonprofits in the United States. One of them purported to be from Harvard University, attaching a fake paper. Its title: Why American Elections Are Flawed. New York TimesHow Donald Trump took the White House. Coverage from the US Election campaign through to Inauguration Day Subscribe.Sign In





Paris Letter: Scathing portrayal of Sarkozy and Hollande published as Socialists go bust






US president takes phone call from King Salman and appears to accept Saudi denials






More election disaster looms for CDU as chancellor moves into damage-limitation mode






Cyril Ramaphosa moves swiftly after finance minister resigns over meetings with Guptas






International diplomatic storm rages on with accusations of racism and ‘brutal abuse’
    Invalid email or password.
AdvertisementClose XDear reader,“Now Is No Time to Quit”: That's my latest column, where I explain why, even now—even as we just watched the institutions of fact-finding fold—I believe the truth will prevail. But it's going to take persistence, which is why I also hope you'll pitch in even just $5 a month to help us reach our goal of $30,000 in new monthly donations this fall.Monika Bauerlein, CEO
Donate
The Heads of State
One Saturday morning in June, two days after the president had announced his intention to withdraw the United States from the landmark Paris climate agreement, Michael Mann was tweeting about Donald Trump.
Mann, a Penn State professor who is one of the world’s most prominent climate scientists, was thinking about the daily barrage of revelations surrounding Russia’s efforts to help Trump win the previous year’s election. The hacked Democratic documents posted on WikiLeaks. The media craze over private emails that had been ripped out of context. Smear campaigns circulating on social media.
“#Russia #Wikileaks #HackedEmails #Sabotaged #ClimateAgreements,” tweeted Mann. “Why does this story sound so darned familiar?”

Seven years earlier, Trump was riffing on a very different set of hacked emails. The real estate mogul had called into Fox News after a blizzard to declare that climate change was a hoax. Trump claimed that “one of the leaders of global warming” had recently admitted in a private email that years of scientific research were nothing but “a con.”
Trump was referring to the 2009 Climategate scandal, in which emails from climate scientists were hacked and disseminated across the internet. Climate change deniers claimed the messages showed scientists engaging in misconduct and fabricating a warming pattern that didn’t really exist. Multiple investigations ultimately exonerated the researchers, but not before a media firestorm undercut public confidence in the science—just as world leaders were meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark, to attempt to rein in greenhouse gas emissions.
In hindsight, the Climategate hack, clearly timed to disrupt the Copenhagen negotiations, looks like a precursor to the hack that helped shape the outcome of the 2016 election. That’s how John Podesta, the Clinton campaign chairman whose stolen emails were posted on WikiLeaks in the final weeks of the campaign, sees it. The parallels go beyond the hacks themselves. “I think it was the intentionality of influencing the public debate,” he says.
One Saturday morning in June, two days after the president had announced his intention to withdraw the United States from the landmark Paris climate agreement, Michael Mann was tweeting about Donald Trump.Mann, a Penn State professor who is one of the world’s most prominent climate scientists, was thinking about the daily barrage of revelations surrounding Russia’s efforts to help Trump win the previous year’s election. The hacked Democratic documents posted on WikiLeaks. The media craze over private emails that had been ripped out of context. Smear campaigns circulating on social media.“#Russia #Wikileaks #HackedEmails #Sabotaged #ClimateAgreements,” tweeted Mann. “Why does this story sound so darned familiar?”Seven years earlier, Trump was riffing on a very different set of hacked emails. The real estate mogul had called into Fox News after a blizzard to declare that climate change was a hoax. Trump claimed that “one of the leaders of global warming” had recently admitted in a private email that years of scientific research were nothing but “a con.”Trump was referring to the 2009 Climategate scandal, in which emails from climate scientists were hacked and disseminated across the internet. Climate change deniers claimed the messages showed scientists engaging in misconduct and fabricating a warming pattern that didn’t really exist. Multiple investigations ultimately exonerated the researchers, but not before a media firestorm undercut public confidence in the science—just as world leaders were meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark, to attempt to rein in greenhouse gas emissions.In hindsight, the Climategate hack, clearly timed to disrupt the Copenhagen negotiations, looks like a precursor to the hack that helped shape the outcome of the 2016 election. That’s how John Podesta, the Clinton campaign chairman whose stolen emails were posted on WikiLeaks in the final weeks of the campaign, sees it. The parallels go beyond the hacks themselves. “I think it was the intentionality of influencing the public debate,” he says.Stolen Emails. Wikileaks. White Supremacists. Donald Trump. It All Happened in 2009.At its core, Climategate was a story about emails—some admittedly embarrassing or poorly phrased—that were dumped online with the intent of altering a crucial global event. WikiLeaks republished the scientists’ emails. Talk radio and Fox News had a field day. Politicians soon followed. Mainstream reporters amplified out-of-context quotes. And the victims of the hack—especially Mann and the University of East Anglia’s Phil Jones—were not prepared for the deluge of investigations, personal attacks, and even death threats that followed.At the time, some observers openly wondered whether Russia might have orchestrated the Climategate hack. Investigators and other experts haven’t found much to support that hypothesis—the true culprit remains a mystery. Mann himself has pointed to the incident’s “curious connections” to Russia and WikiLeaks, but he, too, notes there’s no specific evidence that Moscow was to blame. Still, Mann sees other ways in which the episode was similar to what Hillary Clinton experienced in 2016. Both hacks, he notes, were “intended to impact the global political scene in a significant manner.”Podesta, a leading advocate of climate action during the Obama years, describes Climategate as an early example of hackers conspiring “to take the fruits of illegal behavior, weaponize them, then use them in a political context.” And though the emails contained no evidence of scientific misconduct, Podesta notes, climate change deniers successfully used them to “change public perception and increase skepticism about the need for action at a pivotal moment.”Climategate began in the fall of 2009, when someone accessed thousands of emails and other documents stored on a backup server at the University of East Anglia’s Climatic Research Unit—a prestigious institution in Norwich, England, that is one of the leading centers of global warming research. It wasn’t just CRU employees who were caught up in the hack; their communications with dozens of scientists around the world, including Mann, were stolen as well.On November 17 of that year, links to a zip file containing the stolen material—labeled “FOIA.zip”—began appearing in the comments sections of blogs run by climate change skeptics. The file name had a clear meaning: Skeptics had been engaged in a long-running battle with the university to gain access to scientists’ raw data and communications using the United Kingdom’s Freedom of Information Act. The file itself was stored on a server in Russia, though that server space could have been used by anyone in the world.The hacker also broke into RealClimate—a website run by a group of climate scientists—and drafted a post promoting the emails. NASA scientist Gavin Schmidt found the hacker’s post before it was published; it still sits in RealClimate‘s content management system today.Within days, WikiLeaks published the emails. Its founder, Julian Assange, told PBS that the university had been trying “to suppress information from the Freedom of Information Act.” (At the time, Assange was considered an advocate of radical transparency. After WikiLeaks’ role in publishing Democratic documents hacked by the Russians and corresponding with the Trump campaign, his motives seem far more suspect.)The emails in no way altered the well-established fact that humans are changing the climate. Still, skeptics zeroed in on a 1999 message sent by CRU’s Jones, in which he mentioned Mann’s research and also used the phrase “hide the decline.” Given that Mann was best known for the “hockey stick” chart showing the dramatic increase in global temperatures, the wording sounded nefarious. But it turned out that Jones wasn’t describing an attempt to conceal a decline in temperatures. (The world was warming rapidly, after all.) Instead, he was referring to a scientific method for dealing with complications in tree-ring data.Michael Mann’s groundbreaking “hockey stick” chart—named after the steep rise in global temperatures it depicts—has been validated by numerous independent studies since its publication two decades ago.Intergovernmental Panel on Climate ChangeA series of independent inquiries would later conclude that while the University of East Anglia had improperly dodged open records requests, none of the scientists had engaged in any type of academic misconduct or fabrication. But that wasn’t the story taking shape on the news networks and in major papers.On November 20, a New York Times front-page story opened by noting that skeptics “say [the emails] show that climate scientists conspired to overstate the case for a human influence on climate change.” The Washington Post quoted climate skeptic Myron Ebell—who would later run Trump’s Environmental Protection Agency transition team—as saying the emails exposed an “alarmist political agenda.” The Post even ran an op-ed by Sarah Palin, who claimed that scientists had “manipulated data to ‘hide the decline’ in global temperatures.”Television coverage was even worse. NBC told viewers that “those who doubt that man-made greenhouse gases are changing the climate say these emails…show climate scientists massaging data.” ABC inaccurately claimed that “one of the most damning email exchanges credits Mann with a trick to hide the decline in temperatures.”Mann quickly became a central target for climate change deniers. Right-wing groups and Republican politicians called for the federal government to revoke his research funding and for his university to investigate him. He received an envelope in the mail containing white powder; it turned out to be cornstarch. “You and your colleagues who have promoted this scandal ought to be shot, quartered, and fed to the pigs along with your whole damn families,” declared one emailer. Along with other climate experts, Mann was featured in an anti-Semitic post on the white supremacist website Stormfront—an ominous foreshadowing of 2016.“I could easily brush off many of the attacks,” Mann would later write in his book, The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars, which discusses the right’s assault on his research. “But to the extent that the industry-funded disinformation machine was taking direct aim not just at me—my livelihood, my reputation, my safety—but even my family, I was becoming incensed.”Mann was cleared of wrongdoing by multiple subsequent investigations, including by Penn State. But the personal attacks would continue for years. In a 2012 blog post for the libertarian Competitive Enterprise Institute, Rand Simberg called the university investigation a “whitewash” and compared Mann to Jerry Sandusky, the Penn State assistant football coach convicted of sexually abusing children. “Mann could be said to be the Jerry Sandusky of climate science,” wrote Simberg, “except that instead of molesting children, he has molested and tortured data in the service of politicized science.” (CEI later removed that comparison from the post. Mann is suing CEI and Simberg over the incident.)Other climate scientists experienced similar harassment. Jones, who was the target of much of the media scrutiny and online abuse, was eventually cleared of wrongdoing by his university and has since returned to work. He doesn’t want to speculate on who was behind the hack. “I’ve tried to move on from that,” he told Mother Jones.After three weeks of relentless Climategate coverage, the UN climate conference in Copenhagen, which was intended to lay the groundwork for an international agreement to slash emissions, began. It was supposed to be an inflection point, in which the world would move past debating long-settled science and take serious steps to solve the problem. In the lead-up to the talks, even Trump signed on to a full-page ad in the Times calling on President Barack Obama and other leaders to take bold action to combat climate change. Instead, the negotiations broke down—a diplomatic failure that set climate action back years.For Julian Gregory, the Norfolk, England, detective in charge of investigating the hack, the timing was obvious. The Climategate emails “were selectively taken and portrayed in a way…intended to undermine the scientists and therefore the validity of their science,” he later told Climatewire, after a second batch of stolen emails was released shortly before another round of climate talks. “The conclusion you are led to is that it was done with the intention of influencing the outcome of those conferences.”The hack probably wasn’t the primary reason the Copenhagen talks collapsed. Even before the emails surfaced, there were warning signs that diplomats could be headed for an impasse. Former US officials who participated say they don’t remember Climategate coming up during negotiations. Instead, the Obama administration and other governments simply hadn’t done enough to bridge the divides between the United States, China, and the developing world.But the scandal provided a convenient talking point for those seeking to block climate action. Days before the conference began, Mohammad al-Sabban, the lead negotiator from oil-rich Saudi Arabia, told the BBC that the emails would have a “huge impact” on the talks. “It appears from the details of the scandal that there is no relationship whatsoever between human activities and climate change,” he said. James Inhofe, the Senate’s leading climate denier, traveled to Copenhagen, where he told throngs of reporters that Climategate was proof of what he’d been saying all along: Global warming was a hoax.The most obvious fallout was in the United States, where the emails played an outsize role in the media’s coverage of climate change. According to a study by Matthew Nisbet, then a professor at American University, more than 20 percent of the news and opinion stories about climate change published by five major outlets in December 2009 mentioned the hacked emails.Perhaps even more significantly, the scandal seemed to have a big impact on US public opinion, helping climate change denial and obstructionism become even more entrenched on the right. After Climategate, notes Podesta, “you see attitudinal change [in] people’s willingness to believe the scientific community that climate change is happening.” It’s no coincidence that Trump publicly reversed his own views on the issue just three months later, when he joked that Al Gore’s Nobel Prize should be rescinded and cited the stolen emails. He’s been an outspoken denier ever since.Public trust in the science was already on the decline in the months before the emails came to light. But according to a study by researchers at Yale and George Mason University, Climategate appears to have “deepened and perhaps solidified” Americans’ growing skepticism. That was especially true on the right. Fully 80 percent of conservatives who followed the scandal said they had less trust in scientists as a result. Seventy-three percent said it made them more certain that global warming wasn’t happening. A whopping 69 percent of all respondents who followed the story, and 94 percent of conservatives, agreed with the statement that “scientists changed their results to make global warming appear worse than it is”—an allegation later proved to be unequivocally false.Another study found a similar effect among a particularly influential group of media figures, noting that Climategate had “eroded global warming belief certainty among a large minority of TV meteorologists, at least temporarily.”Sound familiar? Russian intelligence agents followed a strikingly similar blueprint in 2016 after they hacked the Democratic National Committee, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, and Podesta’s personal Gmail account.“If you were a Russian operative [and] pitching influence ops for the DNC, and somebody’s like, ‘Eh, I don’t know about that,’ literally you just turn around and go, ‘Look at how well it worked [with Climategate],'” says Jake Williams, a cybersecurity expert and former analyst at the National Security Agency. “I wouldn’t necessarily say one influenced the other, but certainly it’s good proof that that’s a technique that works.”To access Podesta’s emails, the hackers used a targeted phishing attack that led his office to inadvertently turn over his login credentials. The DNC was hacked by two groups associated with Russian intelligence—one starting in 2015 and another in 2016—also via targeted phishing attacks. Tens of thousands of emails were eventually made public, along with Democratic fundraising reports and other planning materials. Batches of the stolen documents were given to individual news outlets, while other chunks were published directly to the blog of Guccifer 2.0—an online persona thought to be a front for Russian intelligence.By far the most damage was done via WikiLeaks, which published the DNC emails days before the Democratic National Convention. And when the Trump campaign was thrown into chaos after the Washington Post unearthed a 2005 video of Trump boasting about grabbing women “by the pussy,” WikiLeaks began publishing the Podesta emails less than an hour later. WikiLeaks then rolled out new batches of emails on a near-daily basis in the month leading up to the election. Once again, the timing was clearly designed for maximum impact.The emails exposed Democrats’ dirty laundry and fueled the impression that the DNC had helped Clinton defeat Sen. Bernie Sanders in the hotly contested Democratic primary. They also revealed excerpts from paid speeches that Clinton had given to big banks—transcripts that she had refused to release earlier and that seemed to contradict her public rhetoric. “My dream is a hemispheric common market, with open trade and open borders,” Clinton said in one excerpt that was repeatedly highlighted by Trump. Another email revealed that Clinton had assured union officials that she would defend fracking—a disclosure that angered some environmentalists.But as with Climategate, what made the 2016 Russian hacks particularly successful was the obsessive—and often inaccurate—coverage of the emails in the media. “The hacking is only one half of the story,” Podesta says. “It’s a media story, too, because it’s the voyeurism of reading the emails, whether there is much serious in them or not, that is captivating to the media. [It] throws them into high relief, sensationalizes little bits of them. And then at the end of the day when people go back and look at the whole story, they say, ‘Well, what was that about?'”Political jargon was misinterpreted, and innocuous phrases were presented out of context. Years-old private emails were dumped into the public sphere. Benign interactions between reporters and their sources were twisted to imply collusion between the Clinton campaign and the mainstream media. In one particularly absurd example highlighted by the liberal group Media Matters for America, Rush Limbaugh and other conservatives breathlessly reported that Podesta had “admitted” that Clinton hated “everyday Americans.” Podesta had actually meant that Clinton hated the phrase “everyday Americans”—a slogan that her campaign frequently used at the time.The 2016 hacks had devastating personal consequences for their targets. Mann had been compared to a child molester; Podesta was actually accused of child molestation by conspiracy theorists who declared they had detected code words in his emails designed to conceal a child sex ring supposedly operating out of a DC pizzeria. Every piece of the so-called Pizzagate scandal was a lie, but that didn’t stop restaurant staffers from receiving hundreds of death threats. In December 2016, a North Carolina man who claimed to be investigating Pizzagate fired an assault rifle inside the restaurant. Luckily, no one was injured.We still know very little about “Mr. FOIA”—the online persona who claimed to be behind Climategate. His own words suggest he was a lone individual with no government or corporate backing. (Guccifer 2.0 also claimed to have no connection to Russian intelligence, an assertion that US intelligence agencies say is false.)“It was me or nobody, now or never,” Mr. FOIA wrote in 2013. “Combination of several rather improbable prerequisites just wouldn’t occur again for anyone else in the foreseeable future. The circus was about to arrive in Copenhagen. Later on it could be too late.”A November 2009 memo from the University of East Anglia’s IT department, obtained through a public information request, tells us more about the hack itself. This probably wasn’t phishing, like Podesta experienced. Instead the hacker seems to have obtained the files by breaking into the university’s backup servers through a compromised account—CRU’s servers were illegally accessed at least three times in September and October 2009 using stolen or cracked passwords. Once inside, the attacker was able to retrieve the files.Steve Lord, a British cybersecurity expert who reviewed the university memo on the incident, told Mother Jones that the methods used to steal the climate emails, at least according to materials provided by the university, showed “no real sophistication.”“It’s not a particularly complicated setup,” said Lord. “It’s not clear how they got in, but once they’re in, from the information we do have, this is not rocket science.” (You can read the university memo below.)Mr. FOIA has reemerged twice since 2009. In November 2011—just days before the start of another UN climate conference—a new batch of more than 5,000 emails, part of the original set stolen from CRU, was, as before, posted on a Russian server and uploaded to the comments sections of several prominent climate skeptics’ blogs.Theories still abound about who Mr. FOIA was. “The hypothesis, unfortunately, remains today where it started,” Gregory, the local detective, told the BBC in 2012 as the statute of limitations on the crime ran out and investigators dropped the case. “It ranges from a lone individual through to commercial or governmental interests…It could have been anyone on that spectrum. We can’t say.” The Norfolk police declined to discuss the investigation with Mother Jones, and Gregory, who has since left the force, didn’t return requests for comment.The US Justice Department appears to have gotten involved after the second email leak in 2011, though it’s unclear what became of that inquiry. The DOJ, the FBI, and the National Crime Agency, the United Kingdom’s top law enforcement body, would not comment on the existence of investigations.In a 2012 interview with the Guardian, Gregory said his inquiry spanned “most continents”—which likely means computer proxy servers around the world were used to mask the hacker’s true identity. The perpetrator, Gregory said, tried to “leave a false trail” to throw off investigators.Some have speculated that Russia or another petrostate was behind the hack—an idea that gained new currency in the wake of the 2016 election. Vladimir Putin, after all, has periodically flirted with climate change denial, and Russia—which recently overtook Saudi Arabia as the world’s leading crude oil producer—is highly dependent on fossil fuel extraction.But Gregory told the BBC that he’d found no specific information indicating that a government was behind the hack. Other experts agree: With the evidence at hand, it would be “a stretch” to point the finger at Russian hackers, says Lord.Another theory, popular among climate change skeptics, was that a University of East Anglia insider, frustrated by scientists’ resistance to freedom-of-information requests, released the documents and made it look like an outsider had taken them. But according to Gregory, investigators were confident this wasn’t the case.In March 2013, when Mr. FOIA released a third tranche of hacked documents and announced himself in a note published on climate-skeptic blogs, he mocked the idea that the hack had been funded by energy industry groups. “I wasn’t aware of the arrangement but warmly welcome their decision to support my project,” Mr. FOIA wrote, adding that he’d opened a bitcoin wallet to accept online donations. The wallet remains active, and nine payments have been made to the account over the past five years. The value, as of mid-November, was roughly $37,400.“That’s right; no conspiracy, no paid hackers, no Big Oil,” Mr. FOIA wrote. “The Republicans didn’t plot this. USA politics is alien to me, neither am I from the UK. There is life outside the Anglo-American sphere.”It wasn’t until December 2015 that the Obama administration was finally able to piece together a global climate agreement in Paris. Podesta, who had briefly joined the Obama White House the previous year, helped lay the groundwork for the deal. It was immediately denounced by much of the Republican presidential field. One of those critics, of course, was Trump, who on the campaign trail called US involvement in the Paris talks “ridiculous” and promised to pull out of the deal.Just seven months after Russian hackers helped him win the presidency, Trump began to follow through on his pledge.The online version of this story has been updated.It's been a tough several weeks for those who care about the truth: Congress, the FBI, and the judiciary are seemingly more concerned with providing cover for a foregone conclusion than with uncovering facts.But we also saw something incredibly powerful: that truth-tellers don't quit, and that speaking up is contagious. I hope you'll read why, even now, we believe the truth will prevail—and why we aren't giving up on our goal of raising $30,000 in new monthly donations this fall, even though there's a long way to go to get there. Please help close the gap with a tax-deductible donation today.Rebecca Leber is  a reporter in Mother Jones' DC bureau, where she covers environmental politics and policy. She's covered climate and energy for The New Republic, Grist, and ThinkProgress, and her writing has been published by more than a dozen outlets. Reach her at rleber@motherjones.com.AJ Vicens is a reporter at Mother Jones. You can reach him at avicens@motherjones.com. For more of his stories, click here.
Rebecca Leber and AJ Vicens 
Rebecca Leber 
Patrick Caldwell 
Kanyakrit Vongkiatkajorn 
Kari Sonde 
				Copyright © 2018 Mother Jones and the Foundation for National Progress. All Rights Reserved.Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
 
																																																		Can you pitch in a few bucks to help fund Mother Jones' investigative journalism? We're a nonprofit (so it's tax-deductible), and reader support makes up about two-thirds of our budget.																																																														
We noticed you have an ad blocker on. Can you pitch in a few bucks to help fund Mother Jones' investigative journalism?																																						
THE TRUTH WILL PREVAIL, EVEN NOW. It's been a tough several weeks for those who care about the truth, but we hope you'll read why now is no time to quit—and why we need to raise $30,000 in new monthly donations this fall. The erosion of truth we're seeing is downright dangerous, and we're in this fight for the long haul. Join us. 					
THE TRUTH WILL PREVAIL, EVEN NOW. It's been a tough several weeks for those who care about the truth. Read why now is no time to quit, and please support MoJo with a tax-deductible donation today. 					
Russian military intelligence executed a cyberattack on at least one U.S. voting software supplier and sent spear-phishing emails to more than 100 local election officials just days before last November’s presidential election, according to a highly classified intelligence report obtained by The Intercept.The top-secret National Security Agency document, which was provided anonymously to The Intercept and independently authenticated, analyzes intelligence very recently acquired by the agency about a months-long Russian intelligence cyber effort against elements of the U.S. election and voting infrastructure. The report, dated May 5, 2017, is the most detailed U.S. government account of Russian interference in the election that has yet come to light.While the document provides a rare window into the NSA’s understanding of the mechanics of Russian hacking, it does not show the underlying “raw” intelligence on which the analysis is based. A U.S. intelligence officer who declined to be identified cautioned against drawing too big a conclusion from the document because a single analysis is not necessarily definitive.The report indicates that Russian hacking may have penetrated further into U.S. voting systems than was previously understood. It states unequivocally in its summary statement that it was Russian military intelligence, specifically the Russian General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate, or GRU, that conducted the cyber attacks described in the document:Russian General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate actors … executed cyber espionage operations against a named U.S. company in August 2016, evidently to obtain information on elections-related software and hardware solutions. … The actors likely used data obtained from that operation to … launch a voter registration-themed spear-phishing campaign targeting U.S. local government organizations.This NSA summary judgment is sharply at odds with Russian President Vladimir Putin’s denial last week that Russia had interfered in foreign elections: “We never engaged in that on a state level, and have no intention of doing so.” Putin, who had previously issued blanket denials that any such Russian meddling occurred, for the first time floated the possibility that freelance Russian hackers with “patriotic leanings” may have been responsible. The NSA report, on the contrary, displays no doubt that the cyber assault was carried out by the GRU.The NSA analysis does not draw conclusions about whether the interference had any effect on the election’s outcome and concedes that much remains unknown about the extent of the hackers’ accomplishments. However, the report raises the possibility that Russian hacking may have breached at least some elements of the voting system, with disconcertingly uncertain results.The NSA and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence were both contacted for this article. Officials requested that we not publish or report on the top secret document and declined to comment on it. When informed that we intended to go ahead with this story, the NSA requested a number of redactions. The Intercept agreed to some of the redaction requests after determining that the disclosure of that material was not clearly in the public interest.The report adds significant new detail to the picture that emerged from the unclassified intelligence assessment about Russian election meddling released by the Obama administration in January. The January assessment presented the U.S. intelligence community’s conclusions but omitted many specifics, citing concerns about disclosing sensitive sources and methods. The assessment concluded with high confidence that the Kremlin ordered an extensive, multi-pronged propaganda effort “to undermine public faith in the US democratic process, denigrate Secretary Clinton, and harm her electability and potential presidency.”That review did not attempt to assess what effect the Russian efforts had on the election, despite the fact that “Russian intelligence obtained and maintained access to elements of multiple US state or local electoral boards.” According to the Department of Homeland Security, the assessment reported reassuringly, “the types of systems we observed Russian actors targeting or compromising are not involved in vote tallying.”The NSA has now learned, however, that Russian government hackers, part of a team with a “cyber espionage mandate specifically directed at U.S. and foreign elections,” focused on parts of the system directly connected to the voter registration process, including a private sector manufacturer of devices that maintain and verify the voter rolls. Some of the company’s devices are advertised as having wireless internet and Bluetooth connectivity, which could have provided an ideal staging point for further malicious actions.
Attached to the secret NSA report is an overview chart detailing the Russian government’s spear-phishing operation, apparently missing a second page that was not provided to The Intercept.Graphic: NSAAs described by the classified NSA report, the Russian plan was simple: pose as an e-voting vendor and trick local government employees into opening Microsoft Word documents invisibly tainted with potent malware that could give hackers full control over the infected computers.But in order to dupe the local officials, the hackers needed access to an election software vendor’s internal systems to put together a convincing disguise. So on August 24, 2016, the Russian hackers sent spoofed emails purporting to be from Google to employees of an unnamed U.S. election software company, according to the NSA report. Although the document does not directly identify the company in question, it contains references to a product made by VR Systems, a Florida-based vendor of electronic voting services and equipment whose products are used in eight states.The spear-phishing email contained a link directing the employees to a malicious, faux-Google website that would request their login credentials and then hand them over to the hackers. The NSA identified seven “potential victims” at the company. While malicious emails targeting three of the potential victims were rejected by an email server, at least one of the employee accounts was likely compromised, the agency concluded. The NSA notes in its report that it is “unknown whether the aforementioned spear-phishing deployment successfully compromised all the intended victims, and what potential data from the victim could have been exfiltrated.”VR Systems declined to respond to a request for comment on the specific hacking operation outlined in the NSA document. Chief Operating Officer Ben Martin replied by email to The Intercept’s request for comment with the following statement:Phishing and spear-phishing are not uncommon in our industry. We regularly participate in cyber alliances with state officials and members of the law enforcement community in an effort to address these types of threats. We have policies and procedures in effect to protect our customers and our company.Although the NSA report indicates that VR Systems was targeted only with login-stealing trickery, rather than computer-controlling malware, this isn’t necessarily a reassuring sign. Jake Williams, founder of computer security firm Rendition Infosec and formerly of the NSA’s Tailored Access Operations hacking team, said stolen logins can be even more dangerous than an infected computer. “I’ll take credentials most days over malware,” he said, since an employee’s login information can be used to penetrate “corporate VPNs, email, or cloud services,” allowing access to internal corporate data. The risk is particularly heightened given how common it is to use the same password for multiple services. Phishing, as the name implies, doesn’t require everyone to take the bait in order to be a success — though Williams stressed that hackers “never want just one” set of stolen credentials.A detail from a top-secret NSA report on a Russian military intelligence operation targeting the U.S. election infrastructure.Image: NSAIn any event, the hackers apparently got what they needed. Two months later, on October 27, they set up an “operational” Gmail account designed to appear as if it belonged to an employee at VR Systems, and used documents obtained from the previous operation to launch a second spear-phishing operation “targeting U.S. local government organizations.” These emails contained a Microsoft Word document that had been “trojanized” so that when it was opened it would send out a beacon to the “malicious infrastructure” set up by the hackers.The NSA assessed that this phase of the spear-fishing operation was likely launched on either October 31 or November 1 and sent spear-fishing emails to 122 email addresses “associated with named local government organizations,” probably to officials “involved in the management of voter registration systems.” The emails contained Microsoft Word attachments purporting to be benign documentation for VR Systems’ EViD voter database product line, but which were in reality maliciously embedded with automated software commands that are triggered instantly and invisibly when the user opens the document. These particular weaponized files used PowerShell, a Microsoft scripting language designed for system administrators and installed by default on Windows computers, allowing vast control over a system’s settings and functions. If opened, the files “very likely” would have instructed the infected computer to begin downloading in the background a second package of malware from a remote server also controlled by the hackers, which the secret report says could have provided attackers with “persistent access” to the computer or the ability to “survey the victims for items of interest.” Essentially, the weaponized Word document quietly unlocks and opens a target’s back door, allowing virtually any cocktail of malware to be subsequently delivered automatically.According to Williams, if this type of attack were successful, the perpetrator would possess “unlimited” capacity for siphoning away items of interest. “Once the user opens up that email [attachment],” Williams explained, “the attacker has all the same capabilities that the user does.” Vikram Thakur, a senior research manager at Symantec’s Security Response Team, told The Intercept that in cases like this the “quantity of exfiltrated data is only limited by the controls put in place by network administrators.” Data theft of this variety is typically encrypted, meaning anyone observing an infected network wouldn’t be able to see what exactly was being removed but should certainly be able to tell something was afoot, Williams added. Overall, the method is one of “medium sophistication,” Williams said, one that “practically any hacker can pull off.”The NSA, however, is uncertain about the results of the attack, according to the report. “It is unknown,” the NSA notes, “whether the aforementioned spear-phishing deployment successfully compromised the intended victims, and what potential data could have been accessed by the cyber actor.”The FBI would not comment about whether it is pursuing a criminal investigation into the cyber attack on VR Systems.At a December press conference, President Obama said that he told Russian President Vladimir Putin in September not to hack the U.S. election infrastructure. “What I was concerned about in particular was making sure [the DNC hack] wasn’t compounded by potential hacking that could hamper vote counting, affect the actual election process itself,” Obama said. “So in early September, when I saw President Putin in China, I felt that the most effective way to ensure that that didn’t happen was to talk to him directly and tell him to cut it out and there were going to be serious consequences if he didn’t. And in fact we did not see further tampering of the election process.”Yet the NSA has now found that the tampering continued. “The fact that this is occurring in October is troubling,” said one senior law enforcement official with significant cyber expertise. “In August 2016 warnings went out from the FBI and DHS to those agencies. This was not a surprise. This was not hard to defend against. But you needed a commitment of budget and attention.”The NSA document briefly describes two other election-related Russian hacking operations. In one, Russian military hackers created an email account pretending to be another U.S. election company, referred to in the document as U.S. company 2, from which they sent fake test emails offering “election-related products and services.” The agency was unable to determine whether there was any targeting using this account.In a third Russian operation, the same group of hackers sent test emails to addresses at the American Samoa Election Office, presumably to determine whether those accounts existed before launching another phishing attack. It is unclear what the effort achieved, but the NSA assessed that the Russians appeared intent on “mimicking a legitimate absentee ballot-related service provider.” The report does not indicate why the Russians targeted the tiny Pacific islands, a U.S. territory with no electoral votes to contribute to the election.A voter casts her ballot on Nov. 8, 2016 in Ohio.Photo: Ty Wright/Getty ImagesGetting attention and a budget commitment to election security requires solving a political riddle. “The problem we have is that voting security doesn’t matter until something happens, and then after something happens, there’s a group of people who don’t want the security, because whatever happened, happened in their favor,” said Bruce Schneier, a cybersecurity expert at Harvard’s Berkman Center who has written frequently about the security vulnerabilities of U.S. election systems. “That makes it a very hard security problem, unlike your bank account.”Schneier said the attack, as described by the NSA, is standard hacking procedure. “Credential-stealing, spear-phishing — this is how it’s done,” he said. “Once you get a beachhead, then you try to figure out how to go elsewhere.”All of this means that it is critical to understand just how integral VR Systems is to our election system, and what exactly the implications of this breach are for the integrity of the result.VR Systems doesn’t sell the actual touchscreen machines used to cast a vote, but rather the software and devices that verify and catalogue who’s permitted to vote when they show up on Election Day or for early voting. Companies like VR are “very important” because “a functioning registration system is central to American elections,” explained Lawrence Norden, deputy director of the Brennan Center for Justice at the NYU School of Law. Vendors like VR are also particularly sensitive, according to Norden, because local election offices “are often unlikely to have many or even any IT staff,” meaning “a vendor like this will also provide most of the IT assistance, including the work related to programming and cyber security”—not the kind of people you want unwittingly compromised by a hostile nation state.According to its website, VR Systems has contracts in eight states: California, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, New York, North Carolina, Virginia, and West Virginia.Pamela Smith, president of election integrity watchdog Verified Voting, agreed that even if VR Systems doesn’t facilitate the actual casting of votes, it could make an alluring target for anyone hoping to disrupt the vote.“If someone has access to a state voter database, they can take malicious action by modifying or removing information,” she said. “This could affect whether someone has the ability to cast a regular ballot, or be required to cast a ‘provisional’ ballot — which would mean it has to be checked for their eligibility before it is included in the vote, and it may mean the voter has to jump through certain hoops such as proving their information to the election official before their eligibility is affirmed.”Mark Graff, a digital security consultant and former chief cybersecurity officer at Lawrence Livermore National Lab, described such a hypothetical tactic as “effectively a denial of service attack” against would-be voters. But a more worrying prospect, according to Graff, is that hackers would target a company like VR Systems to get closer to the actual tabulation of the vote. An attempt to directly break into or alter the actual voting machines would be more conspicuous and considerably riskier than compromising an adjacent, less visible part of the voting system, like voter registration databases, in the hope that one is networked to the other. Sure enough, VR Systems advertises the fact that its EViD computer polling station equipment line is connected to the internet, and that on Election Day “a voter’s voting history is transmitted immediately to the county database” on a continuous basis. A computer attack can thus spread quickly and invisibly through networked components of a system like germs through a handshake.According to Alex Halderman, director of the University of Michigan Center for Computer Security and Society and an electronic voting expert, one of the main concerns in the scenario described by the NSA document is the likelihood that the officials setting up the electronic poll books are the same people doing the pre-programming of the voting machines. The actual voting machines aren’t going to be networked to something like VR Systems’ EViD, but they do receive manual updates and configuration from people at the local or state level who could be responsible for both. If those were the people targeted by the GRU malware, the implications are troubling.“Usually at the county level there’s going to be some company that does the pre-election programming of the voting machines,” Halderman told The Intercept. “I would worry about whether an attacker who could compromise the poll book vendor might be able to use software updates that the vendor distributes to also infect the election management system that programs the voting machines themselves,” he added. “Once you do that, you can cause the voting machine to create fraudulent counts.”According to Schneier, a major prize in breaching VR Systems would be the ability to gather enough information to effectively execute spoof attacks against election officials themselves. Coming with the imprimatur of the election board’s main contractor, a fake email looks that much more authentic.A detail from a top-secret NSA report on a Russian military intelligence operation targeting the U.S. election infrastructure.Image: NSASuch a breach could also serve as its own base from which to launch disruptions. One U.S. intelligence official conceded that the Russian operation outlined by the NSA — targeting voter registration software — could potentially have disrupted voting in the locations where VR Systems’ products were being used. And a compromised election poll book system can do more than cause chaos on Election Day, said Halderman. “You could even do that preferentially in areas for voters that are likely to vote for a certain candidate and thereby have a partisan effect.”Using this method to target a U.S. presidential election, the Russian approach faces a challenge in the decentralized federal election system, where processes differ not merely state to state but often county to county.  And meanwhile, the Electoral College makes it difficult to predict where efforts should be concentrated.“Hacking an election is hard, not because of technology — that’s surprisingly easy — but it’s hard to know what’s going to be effective,” said Schneier. “If you look at the last few elections, 2000 was decided in Florida, 2004 in Ohio, the most recent election in a couple counties in Michigan and Pennsylvania, so deciding exactly where to hack is really hard to know.”But the system’s decentralization is also a vulnerability. There is no strong central government oversight of the election process or the acquisition of voting hardware or software. Likewise, voter registration, maintenance of voter rolls, and vote counting lack any effective national oversight. There is no single authority with the responsibility for safeguarding elections. Christian Hilland, a spokesperson for the FEC, told The Intercept that “the Federal Election Commission does not have jurisdiction over voting matters as well as software and hardware in connection with casting votes. You may want to check with the Election Assistance Commission.”Checking with the EAC is also less than confidence inspiring. The commission was created in 2002 as the congressional reaction to the vote-counting debacle of 2000. The EAC notes online that it “is charged with serving as a national clearinghouse of information on election administration. EAC also accredits testing laboratories and certifies voting systems,” but it is a backwater commission with no real authority. Click on the link about certifying voting systems and it leads you to a dead page.If there were a central U.S. election authority, it might have launched an investigation into what happened in Durham, North Carolina, on Election Day. The registration system malfunctioned at a number of polling locations, causing chaos and long lines, which triggered election officials to switch to paper ballots and extend voting later into the evening.Durham’s voter rolls were run by VR Systems — the same firm that was compromised by the Russian hack, according to the NSA document.Local officials said that a hack was not the cause of the disruption. “The N.C. State Board of Elections did not experience any suspicious activity during the 2016 election outside of what this agency experiences at other times. Any potential risks or vulnerabilities are being monitored, and this agency works with the Department of Homeland Security and the N.C. Department of Information Technology to help mitigate any potential risks,” said Patrick Gannon, a spokesperson for the North Carolina board of elections.George McCue, deputy director of the Durham County board of elections, also said that VR Systems’ software was not the issue. “There was some investigation there, essentially no evidence came out of it indicating there was any problem with the product,” he said. “It appears to be user errors at different points in the process, between the setup of the computers and the poll workers using them.”All of this taken together ratchets up the stakes of the ongoing investigations into collusion between the Trump campaign and Russian operatives, which promises to soak up more national attention this week as fired FBI Director James Comey appears before Congress to testify. If collusion can ultimately be demonstrated — a big if at this point — then the assistance on Russia’s part went beyond allegedly hacking email to serve a propaganda campaign, and bled into an attack on U.S. election infrastructure itself.Whatever the investigation into the Trump campaign concludes, however, it pales in comparison to the threat posed to the legitimacy of U.S. elections if the infrastructure itself can’t be secured. The NSA conclusion “demonstrates that countries are looking at specific tactics for election manipulation, and we need to be vigilant in defense,” said Schneier. “Elections do two things: one choose the winner, and two, they convince the loser. To the extent the elections are vulnerable to hacking, we risk the legitimacy of the voting process, even if there is no actual hacking at the time.”Throughout history, the transfer of power has been the moment of greatest weakness for societies, leading to untold bloodshed. The peaceful transfer of power is one of the greatest innovations of democracy.“It’s not just that [an election] has to be fair, it has to be demonstrably fair, so that the loser says, ‘Yep, I lost fair and square.’ If you can’t do that, you’re screwed,” said Schneier. “They’ll tear themselves apart if they’re convinced it’s not accurate.”Matthew Colematthew.cole@​theintercept.com@matthewacoleRichard Espositorichard.esposito@​theintercept.com@REspositoNYCSam Biddlesam.biddle@​theintercept.com@samfbiddleRyan Grimryan.grim@​theintercept.com@ryangrimEmail list managed by MailChimp
On Friday, Special Counsel Robert Mueller, as part of his investigation into interference with the 2016 presidential election, charged 12 Russian military intelligence officers with conducting “large-scale cyber operations to interfere with the 2016 U.S. presidential election.” The indictment contains a surprising amount of technical information about alleged Russian cyberattacks against a range of U.S. political targets, including the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, the Democratic National Committee, members of Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign, the Illinois (probably) State Board of Elections, and an American election vendor, apparently VR Systems, and its government customers.While the indictment only describes the U.S. government’s charges in this case, the specific technical evidence presented is compelling and paints by far the most detailed and plausible picture yet of what exactly occurred in 2016.It also sheds light on what the U.S. government is capable of doing when it investigates cyberattacks, as well as how Russia’s Main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff, or GRU, allegedly conducted the attacks — which it denies — and what operational security mistakes they made. Here are what I find to be the most compelling takeaways from the indictment.

A man walks past the building of the Russian military intelligence service in Moscow, Russia, on July 14, 2018.Photo: Pavel Golovkin/APThe indictment says that the organization DCLeaks, which claimed that it was started by a group of “American hacktivists,” and the persona Guccifer 2.0, who claimed to be a Romanian “lone hacker,” are both controlled by the named Russian intelligence officers. DCLeaks operated the website dcleaks.com and the Twitter account @dcleaks_, and Guccifer 2.0 operated the website guccifer2.wordpress.com and the Twitter account @Guccifer_2.Russian officers took steps to anonymize their hacking and infrastructure, according to the indictment, trying to leave no trace of their identity as they rented servers, registered internet domain names, and set up accounts for email, Twitter, and other uses. But they didn’t do the best job compartmentalizing this infrastructure. This allowed Mueller’s team to confirm that the same people were behind a number of ostensibly distinct operations: DCLeaks, Guccifer 2.0, the spear-phishing campaign, and the hacks of the DCCC and DNC networks.For example, the spear-phishing emails that John Podesta, Clinton’s campaign chair, and others received included links to the URL shortening service Bitly. The Bitly account that created these links was registered using the email address “dirbinsaabol@mail.com.” The attackers used that same email address to create an account on a provider where they leased a server, which they paid for using an “online cryptocurrency service” (based on the wording of some instructions quoted in the indictment, I think the service in question may be BitPay). This same cryptocurrency account was used to pay for registering the domain name dcleaks.com. This means that whoever was behind the spear-phishing campaign (and thus the DCCC and DNC hacks) also bought the domain name dcleaks.com, and also leased this server.Before I bring up another example, here’s a quick note about how virtual private networks, or VPNs, work. VPNs can be used to conceal your internet protocol, or IP, address. When you connect to a website, for example twitter.com, while connected to a VPN, that website learns your VPN’s internet address and not your real internet address.Someone used “the same pool of bitcoin funds” to pay for a Malaysian VPN service, as well as a Malaysian server to host the dcleaks.com website, the indictment states. Months later, someone logged into the @Guccifer_2 Twitter account from that same Malaysian VPN account. This confirms that the same people who are behind dcleaks.com also have access to the @Guccifer_2 Twitter account.What isn’t mentioned in the indictment is that, on one occasion, someone reportedly logged into the @Guccifer_2 Twitter account without connecting to a VPN service first, revealing their real IP address. “Working off the IP address,” the Daily Beast stated in March, “U.S. investigators identified Guccifer 2.0 as a particular GRU officer working out of the agency’s headquarters on Grizodubovoy Street in Moscow.”To take over first the DCCC network and then the DNC network, GRU hackers, according to the indictment, used a spear-phishing email, which tricked the recipient into entering their password on a malicious site. They then used the victim’s credentials to access DCCC’s internal network and installed custom malware called X-Agent on “at least ten DCCC computers,” according to the indictment. Soon thereafter, the indictment states, the hackers pivoted to DNC’s network. From one of the DCCC computers, the Russian hackers allegedly “activated X-Agent’s keylog and screenshot functions to steal credentials of a DCCC employee who was authorized to access the DNC network.” Armed with DNC login credentials, they were able to access “approximately thirty-three DNC computers.” Once on the DNC network, they compromised DNC’s Microsoft Exchange Server, gaining access to thousands of emails.After someone hacks a computer and installs spyware, the attacker then sends commands to the spyware to send data back to them. This is typically done by connecting to a computer known as a command and control, or C2, server.According to the indictment, the computer that the Russians leased to act as X-Agent’s C2 server was located in Arizona. After they had allegedly infected computers in the DCCC network with X-Agent, they logged into this C2 server in order to issue commands to specific hacked computers to log keystrokes and take screenshots.The indictment goes so far as to specify exactly what data was collected on this C2 server, and at what times. For example, it says that on April 14, the Russians surveilled a DCCC employee’s computer for eight hours, during which time they captured “communications with co-workers and the passwords she entered while working on fundraising and voter outreach projects.”In the midst of the hack, the DNC discovered what was going on and hired security firm CrowdStrike to investigate it for them. On June 15, CrowdStrike published a blog post, scarce on details, announcing the compromise of the DNC network and attributing the hack to Cozy Bear and Fancy Bear, code names for the GRU hacking units.Five days after CrowdStrike’s blog post, according to the indictment, the Russians allegedly deleted all of the logs from their C2 server that “documented their activities,” including their login history.The fact that the U.S. government had access to the keystrokes and screenshots collected by the C2 server, and even knew at what point in time the GRU agents deleted the activity logs and login history from the server, leads me to believe that the hosting provider likely started to cooperate with the investigation, including possibly sharing snapshots of the hard drive connected to the C2 server. This would allow the investigators to have access to this information.It also appears that the hackers were unaware that the DNC was on to them until after CrowdStrike published their findings. They appeared to have deleted logs from their C2 server after U.S. investigators already had access to it.In addition to leasing a server in Arizona, the Russians also allegedly leased a separate server in Illinois that they used for a separate piece of malware called X-Tunnel, which was responsible for compressing and then uploading gigabytes of stolen documents from the DCCC and DNC networks to the server in Illinois “through encrypted channels.” It is possible that government investigators obtained information from the hosting provider they leased this server from, as well.The quantity of technical details related to GRU’s 2016 cyberattacks show that the U.S. government has some impressive capabilities. But the primary capability they appear to have used wasn’t technical, it was legal: the subpoena. The U.S. government can compel companies to hand over data.Based on reading the indictment, I think that the U.S. government almost certainly received data from Bitly, Twitter, Facebook, Google, WordPress, and probably from several other companies, including BitPay or other cryptocurrency payment processors, VPN providers, VPS hosting providers, and domain name registrars, among others. (Twitter and WordPress declined to comment. BitPay said, “BitPay has received subpoenas from U.S. government agencies but how the information is to be used or why it is requested is not shared with us.” Facebook and Google did not respond to a request for comment.)With access to all of the information that companies have related to specific accounts, like IP addresses the attackers used to login to services from, time stamps of when they were active, copies of emails and direct messages sent, and potentially images of the hard drives attached to servers used in the attack, it’s possible to paint a very detailed picture.One thing that stood out while reading the indictment is how many times the document mentioned exactly what one of the defendants, GRU cyber operations officer Ivan Yermakov, was researching on the internet, and when:How could the U.S. investigators have access to this information? Two explanations come to mind. The most likely is that the National Security Agency — or a foreign partner, like the Dutch intelligence service AIVD, reported to have provided information on the 2016 election-related hacks to U.S. authorities — compromised Yermakov’s computer and regularly logged his keystrokes or accessed his browser history. Another explanation would be that Yermakov used Google while logged into an account to do these searches, and the investigators learned his search history from Google. I find the latter to be less convincing because the search engine Yandex is much more popular in Russia, and are GRU officers really stupid enough to use California-based Google?Another defendant, Anatoly Kovalev, an officer assigned to a different GRU cyber unit, was mentioned only in connection to attacks on the U.S. election infrastructure, not on the Democrats specifically. But one mention stood out:How could U.S. investigators know that Kovalev deleted his search history, as well as records belonging to multiple online accounts? Again, I believe the most likely scenario is that the NSA compromised his computer, accessed his browser history, and perhaps logged his keystrokes and took screenshots from his computer using a C2 server of their own.My guess is that after GRU’s fatal mistake, logging into the @Guccifer_2 Twitter account from their Moscow-based IP address, U.S. investigators learned who worked in that office, what their roles were in the hack, and ultimately, infected some of their workstations with malware to gather further evidence.Metal shelves for crypto-currency mining.Photo: Eugene Odinokov/Sputnik via APThe indictment accuses the Russians of conspiring to “launder the equivalent of more than $95,000 through a web of transactions structured to capitalize on the perceived anonymity of cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin.”Far from being anonymous, bitcoin transactions are stored forever in a public ledger known as the blockchain that’s open for anyone on the internet to inspect. An account that holds bitcoin is called a “wallet,” but unlike traditional bank accounts, bitcoin wallets are just a number — they don’t include the identity or name of the owner. Because of this, if you’re able to acquire bitcoin anonymously, as the Russian defendants allegedly tried to do, you can spend it on anything without the transactions being linked to you.But it turns out, this is much harder than it seems.One method to gain access to bitcoin anonymously is to “mine” it, which involves devoting large amounts of computer power toward solving math problems on random numbers over and over again until you’re lucky enough to get a correct answer, in which case, a lot of money is added to your bitcoin wallet. According to the indictment, the Russians allegedly mined their own block of bitcoin. The indictment also alleges that the Russians used other methods to obtain bitcoin anonymously, including “purchasing bitcoin through peer-to-peer exchanges, moving funds through other digital currencies, and using pre-paid cards.” The latter method refers to buying prepaid gift cards, debit cards, or other similar cards from physical retail stores using cash, and then anonymously reselling them on the internet in exchange for bitcoin.One complication to using bitcoin anonymously is payment processors. While it’s not necessary for bitcoin transactions, many websites that accept bitcoin as a type of payment use companies such as BitPay or Coinbase to help them process it. These payment processors often attach the buyer’s email address and IP address to transactions.The use of these payment processors, along with reusing the same email address for different transactions, helped the U.S. investigators follow the money. They were likely also helped by looking at what was purchased in bitcoin transactions.For example, the indictment states the hackers used their freshly mined bitcoin to purchase dcleaks.com from a Romanian domain name registrar, and that a U.S.-based payment processing company was involved in the transaction. Because the block of bitcoin was used to purchase dcleaks.com, that block must be controlled by GRU officers, and any other transactions from that same block also must have also originated from the GRU.U.S. investigators could have linked the pool of bitcoin that the Russians mined to DCLeaks via information from the domain registrar, the cryptocurrency payment processor, or even just from the email account that would have received notifications and receipts from these two companies.According to the indictment, on June 22, WikiLeaks sent a message to Guccifer 2.0 (the indictment doesn’t specify on which platform) asking that they “[s]end any new material [stolen from the DNC] here for us to review and it will have a much higher impact than what you are doing.”On July 6, WikiLeaks asked again: “if you have anything hillary related we want it in the next tweo [sic] days prefable [sic] because the DNC [Democratic National Convention] is approaching and she will solidify bernie supporters behind her after,” adding that “we think trump has only a 25% chance of winning against hillary … so conflict between bernie and hillary is interesting.”On July 14, Guccifer 2.0 sent an email to WikiLeaks that included an encrypted attachment named “wk dnc link1.txt.gpg.” But the body of the email was plaintext — unencrypted and vulnerable to interception by third parties. The indictment says that the unencrypted body explained that “the encrypted file contained instructions on how to access an online archive of stolen DNC documents.” Four days later, WikiLeaks responded to this email in another plaintext email, saying that it had received “the 1Gb or so archive” and would release the documents that week.On July 22, WikiLeaks published a database containing the hacked DNC emails.The indictment doesn’t publish the full text of this exchange of private messages and emails, although it seems clear from quotations in the indictment that Mueller’s team possesses them. They are consistent, in both content and typo-ridden style, with previous leaked Twitter direct messages between WikiLeaks and its closest supporters. Surely WikiLeaks understood that its Twitter DMs and plaintext emails with its source, Guccifer 2.0, would eventually come to light.Two and a half weeks after publishing the DNC emails, while being interviewed on a Dutch television show, WikiLeaks editor Julian Assange encouraged a conspiracy theory that DNC staffer Seth Rich, who had just recently been killed in what the D.C. police say was a botched robbery, was his source for the DNC emails. After stating WikiLeaks sources face danger, Assange alluded to Rich’s shooting, and again alluded to the risks faced by WikiLeaks sources, before stating “we don’t comment on who our sources are.”“Whistleblowers go to significant efforts to get us material, and often very significant risks,” Assange said. “There’s a 27-year-old, works for the DNC, who was shot in the back, murdered, just a few weeks ago, for unknown reasons as he was walking down the street in Washington.”WikiLeaks did not respond to a request for comment.In the Trump administration’s first leak prosecution, 26-year-old former NSA contractor Reality Winner was indicted under the Espionage Act for disclosing a classified document to a news organization. The news organization in question is widely reported to be The Intercept, which published a top-secret document describing in detail a GRU plot to hack American election vendor VR Systems, and then target its customers — local election officials in swing states — with a spear-phishing campaign.At least some state election officials learned about GRU’s spear-phishing attack from reading about it in the news, not from the federal government — prompting two of them, North Carolina and Virginia, both VR Systems customers, to begin searching their internal emails for evidence of being targeted by the spear-phishing campaign.Two and a half weeks before Mueller’s office issued the indictment against these 12 GRU officers, Winner entered into a plea deal with the Justice Department, pleading guilty to one count of violating Section 793 of the Espionage Act and agreeing to serve 63 months in prison and three years of supervised release.Last year, Reality Winner gave journalists some details about Russian hacking — info supposedly so highly confidential and dangerous that she was sent to jail for 5 years. https://t.co/NCRsggMeOGNow the exact same info is in this criminal indictment released to the public. pic.twitter.com/Jr6Epi5uF3— Peter Sterne (@petersterne) July 13, 2018The key information that Winner is said to have released to journalists — that NSA had evidence that Russia conducted cyberattacks against the the U.S. electoral system — is now being publicly used to indict the GRU agents who allegedly planned and executed that attack. (Other information from the document linked to Winner does not appear in the indictment.)Winner is currently awaiting her sentencing hearing in county jail in Lincolnton, Georgia, where she’s been since her arrest in June 2017. After she’s sentenced, she’ll be transferred to federal prison, where, if she serves the full 63 months she agreed to in her plea deal, she’ll be scheduled for release in 2022.Update: July 19, 2018
The story was updated to note the possibility of a foreign partner helping U.S. intelligence obtain access to Russian targets.Micah Leemicah.lee@​theintercept.com@micahfleeEmail list managed by MailChimp
 Reports of Internet users that have been caught out by email scams continue to increase. Whether it is drivers being told to pay speeding fines via a link on an email, or Facebook users being advised that they have violated the terms of their account, innocent victims continue to be ripped off by cybercriminals using email scams.
Business email compromise scams are also reported to have increased. These email scams involve the cybercriminal gaining access to a corporate email account – such as that of the CEO. An email is then sent apparently from the CEO to a member of the finance department requesting a bank transfer to the cybercriminal´s account. All too often the transfer is made without question.
Many email scams attempt to extract log-in credentials by asking the recipient of the email to log into an account to resolve an issue. The email contains a link to a bogus website, where the recipient keys in their username and password. In the case of the Facebook email scam, this gives the cybercriminal access to the recipient´s genuine account and all their social media contacts.
Many individuals use similar username and password combinations for multiple accounts and a cybercriminal could get the individual´s log-in credentials to all their online accounts (personal and work accounts) from just one scam email. Alternatively they could use the log-in credentials to infect the user´s accounts with malware.
To protect against email scams, security experts advise if you are contacted by email and asked to click a link, pay a fine, or open an attachment, assume it is a scam. Try to contact the individual sender or company supposed to have sent the email to confirm its authenticity. Do not use the contact information supplied in the email. Perform an Internet search to independently obtain the sender´s genuine contact details.
Other measures that can be taken to protect yourself from email scams include:

Carefully check the sender’s email. Does it look like it is genuine?
Never open email attachments from someone you do not know
If you receive an email offering you a prize or refund, stay safe and delete the email
Ensure anti-virus software is installed on your computer and is up to date.

Reports of Internet users that have been caught out by email scams continue to increase. Whether it is drivers being told to pay speeding fines via a link on an email, or Facebook users being advised that they have violated the terms of their account, innocent victims continue to be ripped off by cybercriminals using email scams.Business email compromise scams are also reported to have increased. These email scams involve the cybercriminal gaining access to a corporate email account – such as that of the CEO. An email is then sent apparently from the CEO to a member of the finance department requesting a bank transfer to the cybercriminal´s account. All too often the transfer is made without question.Many email scams attempt to extract log-in credentials by asking the recipient of the email to log into an account to resolve an issue. The email contains a link to a bogus website, where the recipient keys in their username and password. In the case of the Facebook email scam, this gives the cybercriminal access to the recipient´s genuine account and all their social media contacts.Many individuals use similar username and password combinations for multiple accounts and a cybercriminal could get the individual´s log-in credentials to all their online accounts (personal and work accounts) from just one scam email. Alternatively they could use the log-in credentials to infect the user´s accounts with malware.To protect against email scams, security experts advise if you are contacted by email and asked to click a link, pay a fine, or open an attachment, assume it is a scam. Try to contact the individual sender or company supposed to have sent the email to confirm its authenticity. Do not use the contact information supplied in the email. Perform an Internet search to independently obtain the sender´s genuine contact details.Other measures that can be taken to protect yourself from email scams include: by titanadmin | Jan 26, 2018 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News | The exponential growth in the price of cryptocurrencies has been accompanied by similar growth in email campaigns spreading cryptocurrency mining malware.  There has also been a big rise in new mining malware variants, with three new malware variants detected in the past week. Conservative estimates suggest one malware variant has already been installed on at least 15 million systems, although the true figure could well be closer to 30 million.The data comes from the cybersecurity firm Palo Alto Networks, which performed an analysis of the URLs used in the campaign using Bitly telemetry. It is difficult to determine how many systems have been affected since Bitly is not the only URL shortening service being used in the campaign. AdFly is also in use, which suggests the number of infected systems could well be twice as high.The malicious links for this campaign are being sent in spam email. Clicking the links will direct the user to a malicious website containing executable files that install the Monero mining application XMRig using VBS scripts. The popularity of Monero mining is due to the lower processor demands than cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin. Monero mining can take place on less powerful computers such as those typically at home. In addition to spam email campaigns, the malicious executable files are being loaded to popular file sharing websitesSymantec reports there has been a rise in browser-based cryptocurrency mining. Websites owners are loading cryptocurrency miners onto their websites that is implemented using a scripting language. The ease of access to JavaScript APIs that can be used for this purpose has increased the popularity of this mining technique. Symantec also reports there has been a 34% rise in mobile applications containing cryptocurrency mining code.Cryptocurrency mining malware does not pose such a big threat to organizations as other forms of malware and ransomware, but there are implications for businesses. The malware does require a considerable amount of processing power, so there will be an impact on performance on infected machines. Infection will see applications slow considerably, and that will have an impact on productivity.Campaigns are also being conducted that target businesses. The aim is to installing cryptocurrency mining malware on business servers. These attacks are not email-based, instead vulnerabilities are identified and exploited to install the malware, with Apache Struts (CVE-2017-5638) and DotNetNuke (CVE-2017-9822) vulnerabilities commonly exploited.Businesses can prevent cryptocurrency mining malware from being installed on their servers by ensuring all applications are patched and kept up to date. The patch to fix the Apache Struts vulnerability was released in September 2017, yet many businesses have not applied the patch. The DNN vulnerability has also been patched.The risk of infections on employee and home computers requires antivirus and antimalware software and an advanced spam filter to prevent malicious messages from reaching inboxes. Businesses should also be training their staff how to recognize malicious emails. Training programs and phishing email simulations have been shown to help reduce susceptibility to email-based attacks by up to 95%.The past few months have also seen a rise in cryptocurrency mining malware infections via unsecured WiFi networks, with cybercriminals performing man-in-the-middle attacks that hack the WiFi sessions of any user connected to one of the rogue WiFi access points. Unsecured public WiFi hotspots should be avoided, or VPNs used. by titanadmin | Jan 24, 2018 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam Software | In this post we explain two of the most important strategies to adopt to block phishing and ransomware attacks.Last year, Netwrix released a report based on a survey that showed 100% of government IT workers believed employees were the biggest threat to security. While those figures are the highest of many such surveys, the common theme throughout all of the research is employees are the most likely cause of a data breach.One of the biggest areas of weakness is email-based attacks. Research conducted by the Friedrich Alexander University in Germany suggests half of users click links in emails from unknown senders. Those links often lead employees to phishing and malware-laced websites. With such high click rates, it is no surprise that so many IT workers believe employees are the weakest link in their security defenses.Stopping employees from taking risky actions is difficult, so organizations must do all they can to ensure malicious emails are not delivered to inboxes. Only then, can IT workers be sure that employees will not click links or open dangerous email attachments.No business can no survive without email and unfortunately, no spam filtering solution can block 100% of all spam emails, 100% of the time. At least not without also blocking many genuine messages. Organizations cannot rely on a spam filter to block phishing and ransomware threats. It is just one important layer of security. Several other layers are required.Anti-virus and anti-malware solutions are essential for detecting malicious software, but these signature-based security controls are proving less and less effective as years go by. For instance, the solutions are not particularly good at detecting fileless malware.Most businesses further reduce risk by implementing endpoint protection systems that can detect anomalies and unnatural behavior on endpoints, indicative of an intrusion, malware activity, or ransomware scanning for files and making changes.However, AV software and endpoint detection systems only detect phishing and ransomware attacks when they are occurring. If you want to block phishing and ransomware attacks, the most effective solution is a human firewall.IT departments can blame employees for being the weakest link when it comes to security, but if employees are not trained and shown how to recognize malicious emails, they will remain the biggest security threat to an organization.A firewall is the first line of defense, and anti spam software will help to keep inboxes free from malicious messages. The rear guard is made up of your employees. To ensure you have a strong defensive backline, you must provide security awareness training. Many employees do not know that they are taking big risks that could compromise the network. It is up to organizations to ensure that those risks are explained.Most malware and ransomware attacks involve at least some user interaction: The clicking of a link, the opening of a malicious document, or the enabling of a macro. Employees must be told this is how malware is installed and how access to email accounts and networks is gained. By training the workforce to be more security aware, employees can be turned into a formidable last line of defense.While it was once possible to provide annual security training and be reasonably confident that employees would be able to recognize malicious emails, that is no longer the case. Email-based cyberattacks are now far more sophisticated, and cybercriminals are investing considerably more time in developing highly convincing campaigns. Cybercriminals’ tactics are constantly changing. Training programs must reflect that.To develop a strong human firewall, training should be ongoing. An annual classroom-based training session should be accompanied by regular CBT training sessions, provided in bite-sized chunks. Cybersecurity should be kept fresh in the mind with monthly email bulletins, as well as ad hoc alerts about new threats.Research conducted by several security awareness training companies shows, training is very effective. PhishMe, Wombat Security Technologies, and Knowbe4 all suggest that with regular training it is possible to reduce susceptibility to email-based attacks by up to 95%.You can backup all your data to ensure you can recover files in the event of a disaster, but if your backups are never tested you can never be sure file recovery is possible.Similarly, providing security awareness training to employees will not guarantee you have created a strong human firewall. Your firewall must be tested. By sending phishing simulations to your workforce you can find out just how effective your training has been. You can identify weak links – employees that have not grasped the concept of phishing and email security and those individuals can be scheduled additional training. Phishing simulation exercises also help to reinforce training. When a test is failed, it can be turned into a learning opportunity, which helps to improve knowledge retention.Implement technological solutions to block phishing and ransomware attacks and train your employees and test them on all manner of email-based attacks. When the real deal arrives in an inbox they will be prepared and deal with it appropriately. Fail to block emails or provide high quality training, and your company is likely to have to deal with a costly, and potentially disastrous, email-based attack. by titanadmin | Jan 23, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Tax season is open season for cybercriminals and phishers, who increase their efforts to obtain personal information and Social Security numbers in the run up to – and during – tax season. Until April, we can expect many W2 phishing attacks. Make sure you are prepared and do not fall for a scam.The most common method of stealing the information needed to file fraudulent tax returns is phishing. Phishing emails are sent in the millions to individuals in an effort to obtain their sensitive information. Individuals must be on high alert for malicious emails during tax season, but it is businesses that are most likely to be targeted.Payroll employees have access to the W2 forms of the entire workforce. If a single worker can be convinced to email the data, the attacker can file thousands of fraudulent tax returns in the names of employees.The way cybercriminals get payroll staff to part with sensitive data is by impersonating the CEO or CFO in what is referred to as a Business Email Compromise Scam – otherwise known as a BEC attack or CEO fraud.The most successful attacks require access to the CEO or CFO’s email account to be gained. That means the CEO or CFO must first be targeted with a spear phishing email and lured into parting with his/her login credentials. Once access to the email account is gained, the impostor can craft an email and send it to a select group of individuals in the company: Payroll and accounts department employees.The company is researched, individuals likely to have access to W2 forms are identified, and emails are sent. A request is made to attach the W2 forms of all employees who worked for the company in the past year, or for a specific group of employees. A series of emails may be sent, rather than asking for the information straight away.Since the attacker has access to the CEO’s or CFO’s email account, they can delete sent emails and replies before they are seen by the account holder.An alternative way of conducting BEC attacks is to spoof an email address. The CFO or CEO is identified from social media sites or LinkedIn, the email address is obtained or guessed based on the format used by the company, and the email is made to appear as if it has come from that email account. An alternative is for the attacker to purchase a similar domain to that used by the company, with two transposed letters for instance. Enough to fool an inattentive worker.Oftentimes, W2 phishing attacks are not detected until days or weeks after the W2 forms have been sent, by which times IRS tax refund checks have been received and cashed.There are several methods that can be used to block W2 phishing attacks. A software or cloud-based anti-spam service should be used to block attacks that come from outside the company. Configured correctly, the spam filter should block spoofed emails and emails sent from similar domains to that used by the company. However, a spam filter will not block emails that come from the CFO or CEOs account.Multi-factor authentication should be set up on all email accounts to help prevent the first phish that gives the attacker access to a C-suite email address. W2 phishing attacks using spoofed email addresses are much easier to identify and block.It is therefore important to raise awareness of the threat of W2 phishing attacks with accounts and payroll staff, and anyone else with access to W2 forms. Training can greatly reduce susceptibility to W2 phishing attacks. Training should also be provided to the C-suite, not just employees.The number of staff who have access to W2 forms should be restricted as far as is possible. Policies should also be introduced that require any request for W2 data to be verified. At a minimum, a request for the data should be checked by a supervisor. Ideally, the request should be confirmed face to face with the sender of the email, or with a quick phone call. The scammers rely on this check not taking place. by titanadmin | Jan 20, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | The insurance, telecoms, and financial service sectors are being targeted by malicious actors spreading Zyklon malware. A large-scale spam email campaign has been detected that leverages three separate Microsoft Office vulnerabilities to download the malicious payload.Zyklon malware is not a new threat. The malware variant was first detected at the start of 2016, but it stopped being detected soon after and was not extensively used until the start of 2017.Zyklon malware is a backdoor with a wide range of malicious functions. The malware acts as a password harvester, keylogger, and data scraper, obtaining sensitive information and stealing credentials for further attacks. The malware can also be used to conduct DoS attacks and mine cryptocurrency.The latest variant of Zyklon malware can download and run various plugins and additional malware variants. It can identify, decrypt, and steal serial keys and license numbers from more than 200 software packages and can also hijack Bitcoin addresses.  All told, this is a powerful and particularly nasty and damaging malware variant that is best avoided.While the latest campaign uses spam email, the malware is not included as an attachment. A zip file is attached to the email that contains a Word document. If the document is extracted, opened, and the embedded OLE object executed, it will trigger the download of a PowerShell script, using one of three Microsoft Office vulnerabilities.The first vulnerability is CVE-2017-8759: A Microsoft NET vulnerability that was patched by Microsoft in October.The second ‘vulnerability’ is Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) – a protocol part of Office that allows data to be shared through shared memory. This protocol is leveraged to deliver a dropper that will download the malware payload. This vulnerability has not been patched, although Microsoft has released guidance on how to disable the feature to prevent exploitation by hackers.The third vulnerability is far older. CVE-2017-11882 is a remote code execution flaw in Microsoft Equation Editor that has been around for 17 years. The flaw was only recently identified and patched by Microsoft in November.The second stage of infection – The PowerShell script – serves as a dropper for the Zyklon malware payload.According to the FireEye researchers who identified the campaign, the malware can remain undetected by hiding communications with its C2 using the Tor network. “The Zyklon executable contains another encrypted file in its .Net resource section named tor. This file is decrypted and injected into an instance of InstallUtiil.exe, and functions as a Tor anonymizer.”Campaigns such as this highlight the importance of applying patches promptly. Two of the vulnerabilities were patched in the fall of 2017, yet many organizations have yet to apply the patches and remain vulnerable. If patches are not applied, it will only be a matter of time before vulnerabilities are exploited.FireEye researchers have warned that while the campaign is currently only targeting three industry sectors, it is probable that the campaign will be widened to target other industry sectors in the near future.The advice is to implement an advanced cloud-based anti-spam service such as SpamTitan to identify and quarantine malicious emails,  and ensure that operating systems and software is kept up to date. by titanadmin | Dec 27, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice | Digimine malware is a new threat that was first identified from a campaign in South Korea; however, the attacks have now gone global.Ransomware is still a popular tool that allows cybercriminals to earn a quick payout, but raised awareness of the threat means more companies are taking precautions. Ransomware defenses are being improved and frequent backups are made to ensure files can be recovered without paying the ransom. Not only is it now much harder to infect systems with ransomware, rapid detection means large-scale attacks on companies are prevented. It’s harder to get a big payday and the ability to restore files from backups mean fewer organizations are paying up.The surge in popularity of cryptocurrency, and its meteoric rise in value, have presented cybercriminals with another lucrative opportunity. Rather than spread ransomware, they are developing and distributing cryptocurrency miners. By infecting a computer with a cryptocurrency miner, attackers do not need to rely on a victim paying a ransom.Rather than locking devices and encrypting files, malware is installed that starts mining (creating) the cryptocurrency Monero, an alternative to Bitcoin. Mining cryptocurrency is the verification of cryptocurrency transactions for digital exchanges, which involves using computers to solve complex numeric problems. For verifying transactions, cryptocurrency miners are rewarded with coins, but cryptocurrency mining requires a great deal of processing power. To make it profitable, it must be performed on an industrial scale.The processing power of hundreds of thousands of devices would make the operation highly profitable for cybercriminals, a fact that has certainly not been lost on the creators of Digimine malware.Infection with Digimine malware will see the victim’s device slowed, as its processing power is being taken up mining Monero. However, that is not all. The campaign spreading this malware variant works via Facebook Messenger, and infection can see the victim’s contacts targeted, and could potentially result in the victim’s Facebook account being hijacked.The Digimine malware campaign is being spread through the Desktop version of Facebook Messenger, via Google Chrome rather than the mobile app. Once a victim is infected, if their Facebook account is set to login automatically, the malware will send links to the victim’s contact list. Clicking those links will result in a download of the malware, the generation of more messages to contacts and more infections, building up an army of hijacked devices for mining Monero.Infections were first identified in South Korea; however, they have now spread throughout east and south-east Asia, and beyond to Vietnam, Thailand, Philippines, Azerbaijan, Ukraine, and Venezuela, according to Trend Micro.A similar campaign has also been detected by FortiGuard Labs. That campaign is being conducted by the actors behind the ransomware VenusLocker, who have similarly switched to Monero mining malware. That campaign also started in South Korea and is spreading rapidly. Rather than use Facebook Messenger, the VenusLocker gang is using phishing emails.Phishing emails for this campaign contain infected email attachments that download the miner. One of the emails claims the victim’s credentials have been accidentally exposed in a data breach, with the attachment containing details of the attack and instructions to follow to mitigate risk.These attacks appear to mark a new trend and as ransomware defenses continue to improve, it is likely that even more gangs will change tactics and switch to cryptocurrency mining. by titanadmin | Dec 20, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A Q3 malware threat report from McAfee charts the continued rise in malware threats throughout the year. Malware variants have now reached an all time high, with the volume of threats having risen each quarter in 2017.In 2016, there were high levels of malware in Q1, rising slightly in Q2 before tailing off in Q3 and A4. That trend has not been seen this year. The malware threat report shows Q1 figures were higher than the previous two quarters, with a massive rise in Q3 and a continued increase in Q3. Malware threats rose 10% quarter over quarter, rising to a quarterly total of 57.6 million new samples of malware: The highest quarterly total detected by McAfee. That averages out at a new malware sample detected every quarter of a second!The ransomware epidemic has also got worse in Q3, with new ransomware variants increasing by 36% last quarter, fueled by a sharp increase in Android screen lockers. In total, new mobile malware variants increased by 60% in Q3.In its Q3 Malware Threat Report, McAfee noted that attackers were continuing to rely on spam email to distribute malware, with the Gamut botnet the most prevalent spamming botnet in Q3, closely followed by the Necurs botnet. The latter was used to spread ransomware variants such as Locky. Mac malware rose by 7% in Q3, and macro malware increased by 8%.Technologies such as PowerShell are still commonly used to install malware, along with Office macros. New PowerShell malware variants doubled in Q3, 2017, and while new JavaScript malware declined by 26% quarter over quarter, the level of new JavaScript malware is still substantially higher than the level seen in 2016.Vulnerabilities in software and operating systems were also extensively exploited, even though patches to address those vulnerabilities were released promptly.McAfee notes that employees and organizations are making it far too easy for attackers. Employees are responding to phishing emails, are visiting malicious links and are opening attachments and enabling the content. Employers are no better. Patches are released, yet they are not being applied promptly, opening the door to attackers. In many cases, patches have still not been applied several months after they have been released.One of the most commonly exploited vulnerabilities in Q3, 2017 was CVE-2017-0199 which affected WordPad and Microsoft Office. An exploit for the vulnerability was made available through GitHub, making remote code execution attacks easy; provided employees could be convinced to open specially crafted files. Many employees fell for the scam emails.The McAfee Q3 Malware Threat Report highlighted several continuing malware trends, including the increase in the use of fileless malware. PowerShell malware increased by 119% in Q3 alone.Q3 saw a new Locky variant released – Lukitus. Lukitus was spread via spam email, with more than 23 million messages delivered in the first 24 hours since its release. That, combined with other new ransomware threats, have contributed to a 44% increase in ransomware samples in the past 12 months.Q3 also saw the release of a new variant of the Trickbot Trojan, which incorporated the EternalBlue exploit that was also used in the WannaCry and NotPetya attacks.While no industry is immune to attack, it is the healthcare and public sectors that are taking the brunt of the attacks, accounting for 40% of all reported security incidents in Q3. In the United States, healthcare was the most commonly attacked industry.The extensive use of spam and phishing emails to spread malware highlights the importance of using an advanced spam filtering solution such as SpamTitan, especially considering how employees are still struggling to identify malicious emails. Blocking these threats and preventing malicious messages from being delivered will help organizations prevent costly data breaches.The high level of infections that occurred as a result of exploited vulnerabilities also shows how important it is to apply patches promptly. McAfee notes that many of the exploited vulnerabilities in Q3 were patched as early as January. If patches are not applied promptly, they will be exploited by cybercriminals to install malware. by titanadmin | Dec 15, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | Antivirus software vendor Symantec has detected a massive spam email campaign that is spreading Adwind RAT variants. While the Adwind RAT may sound like relatively harmless adware, that could not be further from the truth.The latest Adwind RAT variants have a wide range of malicious functions, and serve as keyloggers that can record login credentials and monitor user activity, take screenshots, hijack the microphone and webcam to record audio and video, and as if that was not enough, the Adwind RAT allows the attacker to download further malicious files.As is now the norm, the emails spreading Adwind RAT variants are convincing and appear to be genuine communications from legitimate firms. At a time when parcels are likely to arrive in the mail, the attackers have chosen a particularly relevant ploy to maximize the chance of emails being opened. Notifications about parcels that could not be delivered.Businesses are also being targeted with malicious attachments claiming to be account statements, invoices, purchase orders, and payment receipts. The emails are well written and appear to have been sent from legitimate firms.The spam emails include two malicious email attachments, a JAR file and what appears to be a PDF file. In the case of the latter, it has a double file extension, which will appear as a PDF file if file extensions are not displayed. In reality, it is another JAR file. The files contain layers of obfuscation in an attempt to bypass antivirus controls.If the JAR files are executed, they drop a further JAR file and run VBS scripts which launch legitimate Windows tools to investigate the environment, identify the firewall in use, and other security products installed on the device. They then set about disabling monitoring controls.The timing of this Adwind RAT campaign is ideal to catch out as many people as possible. The festive period is a busy time, and the rush to find bargains and purchase presents online sees many Internet users let their guard down. Further, as many businesses close over the festive period it gives the attackers more time to explore networks.Infection with the Adwind RAT can see sensitive data stolen, and login credentials obtained, email accounts to be pilfered and abused and access to be gained to corporate bank accounts. A single successful installation of the Adwind RAT can be devastating.Of course, the Adwind RAT spam email campaign is just one example of a malicious actor spreading malware. One example from tens of thousands, each spreading different malware and ransomware variants.Each day new campaigns are launched. Figures from Kaspersky Lab indicate 2017 has seen an astonishing 360,000 new malicious files detected each day.While consumers must be alert to the threat from spam email, the threat to businesses is far greater. The threat is multiplied by the number of employees who have a work email account.A single computer infected with malware is serious, although once a foothold has been gained, the infection can spread rapidly. Recent research by SafeBreach, published in the Hacker’s Playbook Findings Report, suggests that 70% of the time, hackers are able to navigate the network and move laterally once access has been gained. A single malware attack can turn into an organization-wide nightmare infection.The recent ransomware attacks in the United States are a good example. A ransomware attack on the Mecklenburg County government in South Carolina resulted in 48 servers being taken out of action, and that attack was identified rapidly. The Texas Department of Agriculture experienced a similar attack that impacted 39 schools via its network connections.It is now essential to implement a host of defenses to prevent malware attacks. One of the most effective defenses is to upgrade your spam filter to an advanced solution such as SpamTitan.SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam emails and detects and blocks malware using dual anti-virus engines. SpamTitan not only scans messages for the presence of malware and malware downloaders, but also message content for the common signatures of spam and malicious links. When threats are detected, the emails are quarantined before they can do any harm.If you have a spam filter, yet have still experienced an email-based malware or ransomware attack, now is the ideal time to switch providers and discover the difference SpamTitan can make. If you have yet to install a third-party spam filter, there is no time to lose. Take advantage of the free trial and start protecting your organization from email spam and malware attacks.Call the TitanHQ team today for further information on SpamTitan, details of pricing, and for further details on how you can sign up for the no-obligation free trial. The knowledgeable sales team will be able to answer any questions you have. by titanadmin | Dec 13, 2017 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | A particularly nasty new threat has emerged: Spider ransomware. The new crypto-ransomware variant was discovered by security researchers at Netskope on December 10, and the campaign is ongoing.While many ransomware variants give victims a week to make contact and pay the ransom, the actors behind Spider ransomware are far less patient. If the ransom payment is not made within 96 hours of infection, the key to unlock files will be blocked and files will be permanently encrypted. Further, victims are warned “do not try anything stupid, the program has several security measures to delete all your files and cause damage to your PC.”Naturally, that something stupid is not attempting to recover files from backups. If viable backups exist, victims will be able to recover their files without paying the ransom, but the warning may put off some victims from trying.Such a short window for payment does not give victims much time. Many ransomware attacks occur on a Friday, and are only discovered when employees return to work on a Monday. Discovering a Spider ransomware attack in this scenario means businesses will have to act particularly quickly in order to avoid file loss.While the threat is severe, the attackers have made it as easy as possible for victims to pay by providing a detailed help section. Payment must be made in Bitcoin via the Tor browser and detailed instructions are provided. The attackers say in the ransom note, “This all may seem complicated to you, actually it’s really easy.” They even provide a video tutorial showing victims how to pay the ransom and unlock their files. They also point out that the process of unlocking files is similarly easy. Pasting the encryption key and clicking on a button to start the decryption process is all that is required.As with the majority of crypto-ransomware variants, Spider ransomware is being distributed by spam email. The emails use the hook of ‘Debt Collection’ to encourage recipients of the email to open the attachment. That attachment is a Microsoft Office document containing an obfuscated macro. If allowed to run, the macro will trigger the download of the malicious payload via a PowerShell script.The latest Spider ransomware campaign is being used to attack organizations in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the ransom note and instructions written in Croatian and English. It is possible that attacks will spread to other geographical areas.There is currently no free decryptor for spider ransomware. Protecting against this latest ransomware threat requires technological solutions to block the attack vector. If spam emails are not delivered to end user’s inboxes, the threat is mitigated.Using an advanced cloud-based anti-spam service such as SpamTitan is strongly advisable. SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam emails ensuring malicious email messages are not delivered.As an additional protection against ransomware and malware threats such as this, organizations should disable macros to prevent them from running automatically if a malicious attachment is opened. IT teams should also enable the ‘view known file extensions’ option on Windows PCs to prevent attacks using double file extensions.End users should also receive security awareness training to teach them not to engage in risky behaviors. They should be taught never to enable macros on emailed documents, told how to recognize a phishing or ransomware emails, and instructed to forward messages on to the security team if they are received. This will allow spam filter rules to be updated and the threat to be mitigated.It is also essential for regular backups to be performed, with multiple copies stored on at least two different media, with one copy kept on an air-gapped device. Backups are the only way of recovering from most ransomware attacks without paying the ransom. by titanadmin | Dec 11, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | A large-scale North Carolina ransomware attack has encrypted data on 48 servers used by the Mecklenburg County government, causing considerable disruption to the county government’s activities – disruption that is likely to continue for several days while the ransomware is removed and the servers are rebuilt.This North Carolina ransomware attack is one of the most serious ransomware attacks to have been reported this year. The attack is believed to have been conducted by individuals operating out of Ukraine or Iran and the attack is understood to have involved a ransomware variant called LockCrypt.The attack started when a county employee opened an email attachment containing a ransomware downloader. As is now common, the email appeared to have been sent from another employee’s email account. It is unclear whether that email account was compromised, or if the attacker simply spoofed the email address.Opening the email and malicious attachment resulted in the installation of ransomware. The infection then spread to 48 of the 500 servers used by the county. A ransom demand of $23,000 was issued by the attackers, the payment of which would see keys supplied to unlock the encryption.While many businesses pay the ransom demands to allow them to recover files quickly and limit disruption, Mecklenburg County refused to give in to the extortionist’s demands.After the deadline for paying the ransom passed, the individuals behind the attack attempted another email-based attack on county employees although those attempts failed.Recovery from the attack is possible without data loss as the county has backup files that were not encrypted in the attack; however, restoring data on all the affected servers will be a slow and laborious task and the county will continue to experience severe disruption to its services.A similarly large-scale ransomware attack hit Texas school districts in October. The attack occurred at the Texas Department of Agriculture. The Texas Department of Agriculture overseas breakfast and lunch programs at Texas Schools and has access to computer networks used by Texas school districts.Similarly, the attack involved a single employee being fooled into downloading ransomware by a phishing email. The ransomware spread across the network affecting 39 independent Texas schools, and potentially resulting in the exposure of hundreds of student records.Such extensive ransomware attacks are becoming much more common. Rather than simply infecting one device, ransomware is now capable of scanning networks for other vulnerable devices and rapidly spreading laterally to affect multiple computers. In the case of the Texas Department of Agriculture ransomware attack, it was rapidly identified, but not in time to prevent it spreading across the network.As these incidents show, all it takes is for a single employee to open a malicious email attachment for an entire network of computers and servers to be taken out of action. Even if the ransom demand is paid, recovery can be a slow and costly process.Ransomware attacks are increasing, as is the sophistication of both the ransomware and the scams that fool employees into downloading the malicious software. Fortunately, it is possible to implement defenses against these attacks.Both of these attacks could have easily been prevented with basic security measures – An advanced and effective spam filter to prevent malicious emails from being delivered to employees and an effective security awareness training program to raise awareness of the threat from ransomware and phishing emails.Security awareness training and phishing email simulations can reduce susceptibility to email-based cyberattacks by up to 95% according to several anti-phishing training firms, while a spam filter such as SpamTitan can ensure that employees are not tested. SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam emails, ensuring ransomware and other malware-laced emails are quarantined so they can cause no harm.To find out more about SpamTitan and how you can secure your organization and mount an impressive defense against email and web-based threats, call the TitanHQ team today. by titanadmin | Nov 30, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software, Website Filtering | Black Friday deals and Cyber Monday discounts see consumers head online in droves looking for bargain Christmas presents, but each year many thousands of consumers are fooled by holiday season email scams. This year will be no different. Scammers are already hard at work developing new ruses to fool unwary online shoppers into parting with their credentials or installing malware.In the rush to purchase at discounted rates, security awareness often goes out the window and cybercriminals are waiting to take advantage. Hidden among the countless emails sent by retailers to advise past customers of the latest special offers and deals are a great many holiday season email scams. To an untrained eye, these scam emails appear to be no different from those sent by legitimate retailers. Then there are the phishing websites that capture credentials and credit card numbers and websites hosting exploit kits that silently download malware.  It is a dangerous time to be online.Fortunately, if you take care, you can avoid holiday season email scams, phishing websites, and malware this holiday period. To help you stay safe, we have compiled some tips to avoid holiday season email scams, phishing websites and malware this festive period.In the run up to Christmas there will be scams aplenty. To stay safe online, consider the following:Spoofed websites often look exactly like the genuine sites that they mimic. They use the same layouts, the same imagery, and the same branding as retail sites. The only thing different is the URL. Before entering your card details or parting with any sensitive information, double check the URL of the site and make sure you are not on a scam website.It is a service that makes for quick purchases. Sure, it is a pain to have to enter your card details each time you want to make a purchase, but by taking an extra minute to enter your card details each time you will reduce the risk of your account being emptied by scammers. Cyberattacks on retailers are rife, and SQL injection attacks can give attackers access to retailer’s websites – and a treasure trove of stored card numbers.While holiday season email scams used to be easy to detect, phishers and scammers have become a lot better at crafting highly convincing emails. It is now difficult to distinguish between a genuine offer and a scam email. Emails contain images and company branding, are free from spelling and grammatical errors, and the email requests are highly convincing.  Be wary of unsolicited emails, never open email attachments from unknown senders, and check the destination URL of any links before clicking.What better time than holiday season to discover you have won a PlayStation 4 or the latest iPhone in a prize draw. While it is possible that you may have won a prize, it is very unlikely if you haven’t actually entered a prize draw. Similarly, if you are offered a 50% discount on a purchase via email, there is a high chance it is a scam. Scammers take advantage of the fact that everyone loves a bargain, and never more so than during holiday season.Avoid the holiday season crowds and buy presents online, but use your credit card for purchases rather than a debit card.  If you have been fooled by a holiday season scam or your debit card details are stolen from a retailer, it is highly unlikely that you be able to recover stolen funds. With a credit card, you have better protections and getting a refund is much more likely.Websites secured by the SSL protocol are safer. If a website starts with HTTPS it means the connection between your browser and the website is encrypted. It makes it much harder for sensitive information to be intercepted. Never give out your credit card details on a website that does not start with HTTPS.If you order online, you will no doubt want to check the status of your order and find out when your purchases will be delivered. If you recent an email with tracking information or a delivery confirmation, treat the email as potentially malicious. Always visit the delivery company’s website by entering in the URL into your browser, rather than clicking links sent via email. Fake delivery confirmations and parcel tracking links are common. The links can direct you to phishing websites and sites that download malware, while email attachments often contain malware and ransomware downloaders.One of the main reason that holiday season email scams are successful is because people are in a rush and fail to take the time to read emails carefully and check attachments and links are genuine. Scammers take advantage of busy people. Check the destination URL of any email link before you click. Take time to think before you take any action online or respond to an email request.You may choose to buy all of your Christmas gifts on Amazon, but if you need to register on multiple sites, never reuse your password. Password reuse is one of the easiest ways that hackers can gain access to your social media networks and bank accounts. If there is a data breach at one retailer and your password is stolen, hackers will attempt to use that password on other websites.Holiday season is a time for giving, but take care online and when responding to emails to make sure your hard-earned cash is not given to scammers. by titanadmin | Nov 30, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A spam email campaign has been detected that is distributing a form of Cobalt malware. The attackers use the Cobalt Strike penetration testing tool to take full control of an infected device. The attack uses an exploit for a recently patched Microsoft Office vulnerability.The spam emails appear to have been sent by Visa, informing the recipient about recent changes to its payWave service. The emails contain a compressed file attachment that is password-protected. The password required to extract the contents of the zip file is contained in the body of the email.This is an apparent attempt to make email recipients believe Visa had included security controls to prevent unauthorized individuals from viewing the information in the email – a reasonable security measure for a financial communication. Also contained in the email is a RTF file that is not password protected. Opening that file will launch a PowerShell script that will download a Cobalt Strike client that will ultimately give the attackers full control of the infected device.The attackers leverage a vulnerability in Microsoft Office – CVE-2017-11882 – which was patched by Microsoft earlier this month. The attackers use legitimate Windows tools to execute a wide range of commands and spread laterally across a network.The campaign was detected by researchers at Fortinet, who report that by exploiting the Office flaw, the attackers download a Cobalt Strike client and multiple stages of scripts which are then used to download the main malware payload.The flaw has existed in Office products for 17 years, although it was only recently detected by Microsoft. Within a few days of the vulnerability being detected, Microsoft issued a patch to correct the flaw. Within a few days of the patch being released, threat actors started leveraging the vulnerability. Any device that has a vulnerable version of Office installed is vulnerable to attack.This campaign shows just how important it is for patches to be applied promptly. As soon as a vulnerability is disclosed, malicious actors will use the vulnerability in attacks. When patches are released, malicious actors get straight to work and reverse engineer the patch, allowing them to identify and exploit vulnerabilities.  As these attacks show, it may only take a few hours or days before vulnerabilities are exploited.The recent WannaCry and NotPetya malware attacks showed just how easy it is for vulnerable systems to be exploited. Both of those attacks leveraged a vulnerability in Windows Server Message Block to gain access to systems. A patch had been released to address the vulnerability two months before the WannaCry ransomware attacks occurred. Had patches been applied promptly, it would not have been possible to install the ransomware.Protecting against this Cobalt malware campaign is straightforward. Users simply need to apply the Microsoft patch to prevent the vulnerability from being exploited. Using a spam filter such as SpamTitan is also recommended, to prevent malicious emails from reaching end users’ inboxes. by titanadmin | Nov 29, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | Millions of spam emails containing Scarab ransomware have been detected over the past few days. The massive spam campaign is being conducted using the Necurs botnet – one of the largest botnets currently in use.The Necurs botnet has been active for at least five years and now contains more than 6 million zombie computers that are used to send masses of spam emails. Necurs has previously been used to send banking Trojans and many other forms of malware, although recently, the operators of the botnet have turned to spreading ransomware, including Locky.The latest campaign saw the Necurs botnet send out spam emails to more than 12.5 million email accounts in the space of just 6 hours, with individuals in the United States, France, Germany, Australia, and the UK targeted.The emails were typical of other phishing campaigns conducted in recent months. The emails appear to have been sent from well known, trusted brands to increase the likelihood of the malicious attachments being opened. This campaign spoofs printer manufacturers such as HP, Canon, Lexmark and Epson.The emails contain a 7zip file attachment which claims to be a scanned document, with the subject line “Scanned from [Printer company]. The zip file contains a VBScript which, if run, will download Scarab ransomware.Scarab ransomware is a relatively new ransomware variant, first detected over the summer. While most ransomware variants have a fixed price for obtaining the key to unlock the encryption, the authors of Scarab ransomware do not ask for a specific amount. Instead, the ransom payment depends on how quickly the victim responds.As with the NotPetya wiper, users are required to make contact with the attackers via email. This method of communication has caused problems for victims in the past, as if the domain is taken down, victims have no method of contacting the attackers. In this case, an alternative contact method is provided – victims can also contact the attackers via BitMessage.Even though Scarab ransomware is unsophisticated, it is effective. There is no free decryptor available to recover files encrypted by Scarab ransomware. Recovery without paying the ransom is only possible if backups of the encrypted files exist, and if the backup has not also been encrypted.Scarab ransomware is believed to be the work of relatively small players in the ransomware arena. However, the scale of the campaign and the speed at which the spam emails are being sent shows that even small players can conduct massive, global ransomware campaigns by teaming up with the operators of botnets.By using ransomware-as-a-service, anyone can conduct a ransomware campaign. Ransomware can be hired on darknet forums for next to nothing and used to extort money from businesses. More players mean more ransomware attacks, and the ease of conducting campaigns and the fact that many victims pay up, mean ransomware is still highly profitable.Security experts are predicting that 2018 will see even more ransomware attacks. AV firm McAfee has predicted that next year will see cybercriminal gangs step up their attacks and target high-net worth individuals and small businesses, while the campaigns will become more sophisticated.With the threat likely to increase, businesses need to ensure that they have solutions in place to prevent ransomware from being delivered to end users. By implementing an advanced spam filtering solution, businesses can ensure that phishing and spam emails do not get delivered to end users, mitigating the threat from ransomware. Fail to block malicious emails, and it will only be a matter of time before an employee responds, opens an infected email attachment, and installs ransomware on the network.If you are looking for the best spam filter for business use, contact the TitanHQ team today for further information on SpamTitan. by titanadmin | Nov 20, 2017 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam Software | All organizations should take steps to mitigate the risk of phishing, and one of those steps should be training employees how to spot a phishing email. Employees will frequently have their phishing email identification skills put to the test.Since all it takes is for one employee to fall for a phishing scam to compromise a network, not only is it essential that all employees are trained how to spot a phishing email, their skills should assessed post-training, otherwise organizations will not know how effective the training has been.Phishing is now the number one security threat faced by businesses in all sectors. Research conducted by the security awareness training company PhishMe suggests that more than 90% of cyberattacks start with a phishing or spear phishing email. While all industry sectors have to deal with the threat from phishing, the education and healthcare industries are particularly at risk. They are commonly targeted by scammers and spammers, and all too often those phishing attacks are successful.The Intermedia 2017 Data Vulnerability Report showed just how common phishing attacks succeed. Workers were quizzed on security awareness training and successful phishing attacks at their organizations. 34% of high level execs admitted falling for a phishing scam, as did 25% of IT professionals – Individuals who should, in theory, be the best in an organization at identifying phishing scams. The same study revealed 30% of office workers do not receive regular security awareness training. 11% said they were given no training whatsoever and have not been taught how to spot a phishing email.Studies on data breaches and cybersecurity defenses often reveal that many organizations are confident in their phishing defenses. However, many of those companies still suffer data breaches and fall for phishing attacks. Overconfidence in phishing detection and prevention leaves many companies at risk. This was recently highlighted by a study conducted by H.R. Rao at the University of Texas at San Antonio. Rao explained that many people believe they are smarter than phishers and scammers, which plays into the scammers’ hands.You can train employees how to spot a phishing email, but how can you tell how effective your training has been? If you do not conduct phishing simulation exercises, you cannot be sure that your training has been effective. There will always be some employees that require more training than others and employees that do not pay attention during training. You need to find these weak links. The best way to do that is with phishing simulation exercises.Conduct dummy phishing exercises and see whether your employees are routinely putting their training into action. If an employee fails a phishing test, you can single them out to receive further training. Each failed simulation can be taken as a training opportunity. With practice, phishing email identification skills will improve.Most employees receive phishing emails on a daily basis. Some are easy to identify, others less so. Fortunately spam filters catch most of these emails, but not all of them. It is therefore essential to train employees how to spot a phishing email and to conduct regular training sessions. One training session a year is no longer sufficient. Scammers are constantly changing tactics. It is important to ensure employees are kept up to speed on the latest threats.During your regular training sessions, show your employees how to spot a phishing email and what to do when they receive suspicious messages. In particular, warn them about the following tactics:The 2017 Spear Phishing Report from GreatHorn indicates 91% of spear phishing attacks spoof display names. This tactic makes the recipient believe the email has been sent from a trusted colleague, friend, family member or company. This is one of the most important ways to spot a phishing email.Mitigation: Train employees to hover their mouse arrow over the sender to display the true email address. Train employees to forward emails rather than reply. The true email address will be displayed.This year, business email compromise (BEC) scams have soared. These scams were extensively used to obtain W-2 Form tax information during tax season. This attack method involves the use of real email accounts – typically those of the CEO or senior executives – to send requests to employees to make bank transfers and send sensitive data.Mitigation: Implement policies that require any email requests for sensitive information to be verified over the phone, and for all new bank transfer requests and account changes to be verified.The Proofpoint Quarterly Threat Report for Q3 showed there was a 600% increase in the use of malicious URLs in phishing emails quarter over quarter, and a 2,200% increase from this time last year. These URLs usually direct users to sites where they are asked to login using their email credentials. Oftentimes they link to sites where malware is silently downloaded.Mitigation: Train employees to hover their mouse arrow over the URL to display the true URL. Encourage employees to visit websites by entering the URL manually, rather than using embedded links.Scammers want email recipients to take action quickly. The faster the response the better. If employees stop and think about the request, or check the email carefully, there is a high chance the scam will be detected. Phishing emails often include some urgent request or immediate need for action. “Your account will be closed,” “You will lose your credit,” “Your parcel will not be delivered,” “Your computer is at risk,” Etc.Mitigation: Train employees to stop and think. An email request may seem urgent and contain a threat, but this tactic is commonly used to get people to take quick action without engaging their brains.Many phishing scams come from African countries, Eastern Europe and Russia – Places where English is not the main language. While phishing scams are becoming more sophisticated, and more care is taken crafting emails, spelling mistakes and poor grammar are still common and are a key indicator that emails are not genuine.Mitigation: Train employees to look for spelling mistakes and grammatical errors. Companies check their emails carefully before sending them.Training employees how to spot a phishing email should be included in your cybersecurity strategy, but training alone will not prevent all phishing-related data breaches.  There may be a security culture at your organizations, and employees skilled phish detectors, but every employee can have an off day from time to time. It is therefore important to make sure as few phishing emails as possible reach employees’ inboxes, and for that to happen, you need an advanced spam filtering solution.SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam email and includes dual anti-virus engines to ensure malicious messages are blocked. The low false positive rate also ensures genuine emails do not trigger the spam filter and are delivered.If you want to improve your security defenses, train employees how to spot a phishing email and implement SpamTitan to stop phishing emails from reaching inboxes. With technological and human solutions you will be better protected.We have compiled a useful infographic to highlight how important it is to train staff how to spot a phishing email and some of the common identifiers that an email is not genuine: by titanadmin | Nov 15, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | Ordinypt malware is currently being used in targeted attacks on companies in Germany. While Ordinypt malware appears to victims to be ransomware, the malware is actually a wiper.Infection sees files made inaccessible, and as with ransomware, a ransom demand is issued. The attackers ask for 0.12 Bitcoin – around $836 – to restore files.Ordinypt malware does not encrypt files – it simply deletes the original file name and replaces it with a random string of letters and numbers. The contents of files are also replaced with random letters and numbers.Even if the ransom demand is paid, the attackers do not have a mechanism to allow victims to recover their original files. The only sure-fire way to recover files is to restore them from a backup. In contrast to many ransomware variants that make it difficult to recover files by deleting Windows Shadow Volume copies, those are left intact, so it may be possible for users to recover some of their files.Ordinypt malware – or HSDFSDCrypt as it was originally known – was discovered by Michael Gillespie. A sample of the malware was obtained and analyzed by German security researcher Karsten Hahn from G Data Security. G Data Security renamed the malware Ordinypt.Hahn notes that Ordinypt malware is poorly written with a bad coding style, indicating this is not the work of a skilled hacker. Hahn said, this is “A stupid malware that destroy information of enterprises and innocent people and try steal money.”The attackers are using a common technique to maximize the number of infections. The malware is disguised as PDF files which are distributed via spam email. The messages claim to be applications in reply to job adverts. Two files are included in a zip file attachment, which appear to be a resume and a CV.While the files appear to be PDFs, and are displayed as such, they actually have a double extension. If the user’s computer has file extensions hidden, all that will be displayed is filename.pdf, when in actual fact the file is filename.pdf.exe. Clicking on either of the files will run the executable and launch Ordinypt malware.In recent months there have been several wiper malware variants detected that pretend to be ransomware. The attackers are taking advantage of the publicity surrounding ransomware attacks, and are fooling end users into paying a ransom, when there is no way of recovering files. It is not clear whether the reason for the attacks is to make money. It is possible that these attacks are simply intended to cause disruption to businesses, as was the case with the NotPetya wiper attacks.Regardless of how poorly written this malware is, it is still effective and can cause significant disruption to businesses. Protecting against this, and other email-based malware threats, requires a combination of end user training and technology.End users should be informed of the risks of opening attachments from unknown senders and should assume that all such emails could be malicious. In this case, the malware is poorly written but the emails are not. They use perfect German and are highly believable. HR employees could be easily fooled by a ruse such as this.The best protection against threats such as these is an advanced spam filter such as SpamTitan. Preventing these emails from reaching inboxes is the best defense.By configuring the spam filter to block executable files, the messages will be rerouted to a quarantine folder rather than being delivered, mitigating the threat.For further information on how a spam filter can help to block email-based threats and to register for a free trial of SpamTitan for your business, contact the TitanHQ team today. by titanadmin | Nov 14, 2017 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A new variant of the Ursnif banking Trojan has been detected and the actors behind the latest campaign have adopted a new tactic to spread the malware more rapidly.  Ransomware attacks may make the headlines, but banking Trojans can cause considerably more damage. The $60 million heist from a Taiwanese bank last month shows just how serious infection with banking Trojans can be. The Dridex Trojan raked in more than $40 million in 2015.The Ursnif banking Trojan is one of the most commonly used Trojans. As with other banking Trojans, the purpose of the Ursnif Trojan is to steal credentials such as logins to banking websites, corporate bank details, and credit card numbers. The stolen credentials are then used for financial transactions. It is not uncommon for accounts to be emptied before the transactions are discovered, by which time the funds have cleared, have been withdrawn, and the criminal’s account has been closed. Recovering the stolen funds can be impossible.Infection will see the malware record a wide range of sensitive data, capturing credentials as they are entered through the browser. The Ursnif banking Trojan also takes screenshots of the infected device and logs keystrokes. All of that information is silently transmitted to the attacker’s C2 server.Banking Trojans can be installed in a number of ways. They are often loaded onto websites where they are downloaded in drive-by attacks. Traffic is generated to the malicious websites via malvertising campaigns or spam emails contacting hyperlinks. Legitimate websites are compromised using brute force tactics, and kits loaded to the sites that prey on individuals who have failed to keep their software up to date. Oftentimes, downloads are sent via spam email, hidden in attachments.Spam email has previously been used to spread the Ursnif banking Trojan, and the latest campaign is no different in that respect. However, the latest campaign uses a new tactic to maximize the chance of infection and spread infections more rapidly and widely. Financial institutions have been the primary target of this banking Trojan, but with this latest attack method they are far more widespread.Infection will see the user’s contact list abused and spear phishing emails sent to each of the user’s contacts. Since the spear phishing emails arrive from a trusted email account, the likelihood of the emails being opened is significantly increased. Simply opening the email will not result in infection. For that to occur, the recipient must open the email attachment. Again, since it has come from a trusted sender, that is more likely.The actors behind this latest Ursnif banking Trojan campaign have another trick to increase trust and ensure their payload is delivered. The spear phishing emails contain message threads from past conversations. The email appears to be a response to a previous email, and include details of past conversations.A short line of text is included as a prompt to get the recipient to open the email attachment – A Word document containing a malicious macro. That macro needs to be authorized to run – if macros have not been set to run automatically, but it will not until the Word document is closed. When the macro runs, it launches PowerShell commands that download the Ursnif Trojan, which then starts logging activity on the infected device and sends further spear phishing emails to the new victim’s contact list.This is not a brand-new tactic, but it is new to Ursnif – and it is likely to see infections spread much more quickly. Further, the malware incorporates a number of additional tactics to hamper detection, allowing information to be stolen and bank accounts emptied before infection is detected – the Trojan even deletes itself once it has run.Malware is constantly evolving, and new tactics are constantly developed to increase the likelihood of infection. The latest campaign shows just how important it is to block email threats before they reach end users’ inboxes.With an advanced spam filter such as SpamTitan in place, malicious emails can be blocked to stop them from reaching end user’s inboxes, greatly reducing the risk of malware infections. by titanadmin | Nov 2, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A new wave of cyberattacks on financial institutions using malware called the Silence Trojan has been detected. In contrast to many attacks on banks that target the bank customers, this attack targets the bank itself. The attack method bears a number of similarities to the attacks conducted by the Eastern European hacking group, Carbanak.The Silence Trojan is being used to target banks and other financial institutions in several countries, although so far, the majority of victims are in Russia. The similarity of the Silence Trojan attacks to Carbanak suggests these attacks could be conducted by Carbanak, or a spinoff of that group, although that has yet to be established.The attacks start with the malicious actors behind the campaign gaining access to banks’ networks using spear phishing campaigns. Spear phishing emails are sent to bank employees requesting they open an account. The emails are well written, and the premise is believable, especially since in many cases the emails are sent from within using email addresses that have previously been compromised in other attacks. When emails are sent from within, the requests seem perfectly credible.Some of these emails were intercepted by Kaspersky Lab. Researchers report that the emails contain a Microsoft Compiled HTML Help file with the extension .chm.These files contain JavaScript, which is run when the attachments are opened, triggering the download of a malicious payload from a hardcoded URL. That initial payload is a VBS script, which in turn downloads the dropper – a Win32 executable binary, which enables contact to be established between the infected machine and the attacker’s C2 server. Further malicious files, including the Silence Trojan, are then downloaded.The attackers gain persistent access to an infected computer and spend a considerable amount of time gathering data. Screen activity is recorded and transmitted to the C2, with the bitmaps combined to form a stream of activity from the infected device, allowing the attackers to monitor day to day activities on the bank network.This is not a quick smash and grab raid, but one that takes place over an extended period. The aim of the attack is to gather as much information as possible to maximize the opportunity to steal money from the bank.Since the attackers are using legitimate administration tools to gather intelligence, detecting the attacks in progress is complicated. Implementing solutions to detect and block phishing attacks can help to keep banks protected.Since security vulnerabilities are often exploited, organizations should ensure that all vulnerabilities are identified and corrected.  Kaspersky Lab recommends conducting penetration tests to identify vulnerabilities before they are exploited by hackers.Kaspersky Lab notes that when an organization has already been compromised, the use of .chm attachments in combination with spear phishing emails from within the organization has proved to be a highly effective attack method for conducting cyberattacks on financial institutions. by titanadmin | Oct 30, 2017 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software, Website Filtering | 2017 has seen a major rise in malicious spam email volume. As the year has progressed, the volume of malicious messages sent each month has grown. A new report from Proofpoint shows malicious spam email volume rose by 85% in Q3, 2017.A deeper dive into the content of those messages shows cybercriminals’ tactics have changed. In 2017, there has been a notable rise in the use of malicious URLs sent via email compared to malicious attachments containing malware. URL links to sites hosting malware have jumped by an astonishing 600% in Q3, which represents a 2,200% increase since this time last year. This level of malicious URLs has not been seen since 2014.The links direct users to malicious websites that have been registered by cybercriminals, and legitimate sites that have been hijacked and loaded hacking toolkits. In many cases, simply clicking on the links is all that is required to infect the user’s computer with malware.While there is a myriad of malware types now in use, the biggest threat category in Q3 was ransomware, which accounted for 64% of all email-based malware attacks. There are many ransomware variants in use, but the undisputed king in Q3 was Locky, accounting for 55% of total message volume and 86% of all ransomware attacks. There was also a rising trend in destructive ransomware – ransomware that encrypts files but does not include the option of letting victims’ recover their files.The second biggest malware threat category was banking Trojans, which accounted for 24% of malicious spam email volume. Dridex has long been a major threat, although in Q3 it was a Trojan called The Trick that become the top banking Trojan threat. The Trick Trojan was used in 70% of all banking Trojan attacks.Unsurprisingly, with such as substantial rise in malicious spam email volume, email fraud has also risen, up 12% quarter over quarter and up 32% from this time last year.Cybercriminals are constantly changing tactics and frequently switch malware variants and attack methods, but for the time being at least, exploit kits are still not favored. Exploit kit attacks are at just 10% of the level of last year’s high, with spam email now the main method of malware delivery.With malicious spam email volume having increased once again, and a plethora of new threats and highly damaging malware attacks posing a very real risk, it is essential that businesses double down on their defenses. The best way to defend against email threats is to improve spam defenses. An advanced spam filtering solution is essential for blocking email threats. The more malicious emails that are captured and prevented from being delivered, the lower the chance of end users clicking on malicious links and downloading malware.SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam emails and is one of the most advanced and best spam filters for business use. SpamTitan helps keep inboxes free from malware threats. No single solution can block all email threats, so a spam filtering solution should be accompanied with endpoint security solutions, web filters to block malicious links from being visited, antimalware and antivirus solutions, and email authentication technology.While it is easy to concentrate on technology to protect against email threats, it is important not to forget to train employees to be more security aware. Regular training sessions, cybersecurity newsletters and bulletins about the latest threats, and phishing simulation exercises can help employees improve their threat detection skills and raise cybersecurity awareness. by titanadmin | Oct 23, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Website Filtering | On Friday, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) computer emergency readiness team (US-CERT) issued a new warning about phishing attacks on energy companies and other critical infrastructure sectors.Advanced persistent threat (APT) actors are conducting widespread attacks on organizations in the energy, aviation, nuclear, water, and critical manufacturing sectors. Those attacks, some of which have been successful, have been occurring with increasing frequency since at least May 2017. The group behind the attack has been called Dragonfly by AV firm Symantec, which reported on the attacks in September.DHS believes the Dragonfly group is a nation-state sponsored hacking group whose intentions are espionage, open source reconnaissance and cyberattacks designed to disrupt energy systems.These cyberattacks are not opportunistic like most phishing campaigns. They are targeted attacks on specific firms within the critical infrastructure sectors. While some firms have been attacked directly, in many cases the attacks occur through a ‘staging’ company that has previously been compromised. These staging companies are trusted vendors of the targeted organization. By conducting attacks through those companies, the probability of an attack on the target firm succeeding is increased.DHS warns that the attackers are using several methods to install malware and obtain login credentials. The phishing attacks on energy companies have included spear phishing emails designed to get end users to reveal their login credentials and malicious attachments that install malware.In the case of the former, emails direct users to malicious websites where they are required to enter in their credentials to confirm their identity and view content. While some websites have been created by the attackers, watering hole attacks are also occurring on legitimate websites that have been compromised with malicious code. DHS warns that approximately half of the attacks have occurred through sites used by trade publications and informational websites “related to process control, ICS, or critical infrastructure.”Phishing emails containing malicious attachments are used to directly install malware or the files contain hyperlinks that direct the user to websites where a drive-by malware download occurs. The links are often shortened URLS creating using the bit.ly and tinyurl URL shortening services. The attackers are also using email attachments to leverage Windows functions such as Server Message Block (SMB) protocol to retrieve malicious files. A similar SMB technique is also used to harvest login credentials.The malicious attachments are often PDF files which claim to be policy documents, invitations, or resumés. Some of the phishing attacks on energy companies have used a PDF file attachment with the name “AGREEMENT & Confidential.” In this case, the PDF file does not include any malicious code, only a hyperlink to a website where the user is prompted to download the malicious payload.US-CERT has advised companies in the targeted sectors that the attacks are ongoing, and action should be taken to minimize risk. Those actions include implementing standard defenses to prevent web and email-based phishing attacks such as spam filtering solutions and web filters.Since it is possible that systems may have already been breached, firms should be regularly checking for signs of an intrusion, such as event and application logs, file deletions, file changes, and the creation of new user accounts. by titanadmin | Oct 20, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has made the use of email authentication technology mandatory for all federal agencies. There have been numerous email security incidents affecting government agencies in recent years. Federal agencies are a major target for spammers, scammers, and phishers and the email security defenses of federal agencies are constantly tested.One of the latest incidents involved the spoofing of an email account used by Jared Kushner, causing considerable embarrassment for White House officials. Homeland Security Adviser Tom Bosser was one of the individuals who was fooled into believing the emails were genuine. In his case, the emails were not part of a phishing campaign but were just ‘a bit of fun’ by a UK prankster. However, there are plenty of individuals and groups that have much more sinister motives.When those cybercriminals succeed, not only is it a major embarrassment for government agencies, it can pose a major threat to national security. When national security is at stake, it pays to have excellent email defenses. However, in the United States (and elsewhere) they are often found to be lacking.Action clearly needs to be taken to prevent phishing attacks, reduce the potential for government domains to be spoofed, and to make it much harder for phishing emails to be delivered to federal employees’ inboxes. Agari has reported that 90% of 400 government agencies’ protected domains have been targeted with deceptive emails and 25% of all federal agency emails are fraudulent. Even so, email authentication technology is often not used. That is, until now.Now the DHS has taken action and has made it mandatory for all federal agencies to adopt DMARC. While some federal agencies have already implemented DMARC – the Social Security Administration and the Federal Trade Commission for example – they number in the few. Only 9% of domains have implemented DMARC and use it to block unauthenticated emails, while 82% of federal domains do not use the DMARC email authentication standard at all. Now all federal agencies have been given just 30 days to submit a plan of action and 90 days to implement DMARC. DHS has also made it mandatory for all federal websites to be switched to a secure connection (HTTPS) and for STARTTLS to be implemented for email.DMARC is an email authentication technology that can be adopted to help authenticate emails, block spam, and reduce the volume of phishing emails that are delivered to inboxes. DMARC is not infallible, but it does offer an additional layer of protection for email, reducing the volume of email threats by around 77%. DMARC also restricts use of domains to legitimate senders. By adopting DMARC, when consumers receive an email from a federal agency such as the IRS, FEMA, or DHHS, they should be able to trust that email, at least once DMARC is implemented.While some large enterprises have already adopted DMARC, two thirds of Fortune 500 companies do not use DMARC at all. Implementing the email authentication control is not without its problems. For small to medium sized businesses, implementing DMARC can be problematic. Part of the problem is many businesses need to secure their own internal email systems, but also cloud-based email, and third-party mailing services such as MailChimp or Salesforce. The task of implementing DMARC is often seen as too complex, and even when DMARC is used, it often fails and rarely are the full benefits gained. Consider that even when DMARC is adopted, 23% of phishing emails still make it past defenses, and it is easy to see why it is often not implemented. That said, email authentication technology is required to keep businesses protected from phishing threats.Office 365 uses DMARC to help filter out phishing emails, but on its own it is not sufficient to block all threats. Businesses that use Office 365 can greatly improve their defenses against malicious emails by also adopting a third-party spam filtering solution such as SpamTitan.SpamTitan incorporates many of the control mechanisms used by Microsoft, but also adds greylisting to greatly improve spam detection rates. Greylisting involves rejecting all emails and requesting they are resent. Since genuine emails are resent quickly, and spam emails are typically not resent as spam servers are busy conducting huge spamming campaigns, this additional control helps to identify far more malicious and unwanted emails. This additional control, along with the hundreds of checks performed by SpamTitan helps to keep spam detection rates well above 99.9%.If you want to secure your email and block more phishing threats, contact the TitanHQ team today for more information on how SpamTitan can help to keep your inboxes spam free and your networks protected from malware and ransomware. by titanadmin | Oct 13, 2017 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Phishing & Email Spam | Microsoft Office documents containing malicious macros are commonly used to spread malware and ransomware. However, security researchers have now identified Microsoft Office attacks without macros, and the technique is harder to block.While it is possible to disable macros so they do not run automatically, and even disable macros entirely, that will not protect you from this new attack method, which leverages a feature of MS Office called Dynamic Data Exchange or DDE, according to researchers at SensePost. This in-built feature of Windows allows two applications to share the same data, for example MS Word and MS Excel. DDE allows a one- time exchange of data between two applications or continuous sharing of data.Cybercriminals can use this feature of MS Office to get a document to execute an application without the use of macros as part of a multi-stage attack on the victim. In contrast to macros which flash a security warning before being allowed to run, this attack method does not present the user with a security warning as such.Opening the MS Office file will present the user with a message saying “This document contains links that may refer to other files. Do you want to open this document with the data from the linked files?” Users who regularly use files that use the DDE protocol may automatically click on yes.A second dialog box is then displayed asking the user to confirm that they wish to execute the file specified in the command, but the researchers explain that it is possible to suppress that warning.This technique has already been used by at least one group of hackers in spear phishing campaigns, with the emails and documents appearing to have been sent from the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). In this case, the hackers were using the technique to infect users with DNSMessenger fileless malware.Unlike macros, disabling DDE is problematic. While it is possible to monitor for these types of attacks, the best defense is blocking the emails that deliver these malicious messages using a spam filter, and to train staff to be more security aware and to verify the source of the email before opening any attachments.If you have rules set to detect ransomware attacks by scanning for specific file extensions, you will need to update your rules with two new extensions to detect two new Locky ransomware variants. The authors of Locky ransomware have updated their code again, marking four new changes now in a little over a month.In August and September, Locky was using the .lukitus and .diablo extensions. Then the authors switched to the .ykcol extension. In the past week, a further campaign has been detected using the .asasin extension.The good news regarding the latter file extension, is it is being distributed in a spam email campaign that will not result in infection. An error was made adding the attachment. However, that is likely to be corrected soon.The ykcol variant is being spread via spam email and uses fake invoices as the lure to get users to open the attachments. The documents contain a macro that launches a JavaScript or PowerShell downloader than installs and runs the Locky binary. The .asasin variant is being spread via emails that spoof RightSignature, and appear to have been sent from the documents[@]rightsignature.com email address. The emails claim the attached file has been completed and contains a digital signature.The authors of Locky are constantly changing tactics. They use highly varied spam campaigns, a variety of social engineering techniques, and various attachments and malicious URLs to deliver their malicious payload.For this reason, it is essential to implement a spam filtering solution to prevent these emails from being delivered to end users’ inboxes. You should also ensure you have multiple copies of backups stored in different locations, and be sure to test those backups to make sure file recovery is possible.To find out more about how you can protect your networks from malicious email messages – those containing macros as well as non-macro attacks – contact the TitanHQ team today. by titanadmin | Oct 11, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | FormBook malware is being used in targeted attacks on the manufacturing and aerospace sectors according to researchers at FireEye, although attacks are not confined to these industries.So far, the attacks appear to have been concentrated on organizations in the United States and South Korea, although it is highly likely that attacks will spread to other areas due to the low cost of this malware-as-a-service, the ease of using the malware, and its extensive functionality.FormBook malware is being sold on underground forms and can be rented cheaply for as little as $29 a month. Executables can be generated using an online control panel, a process that requires next to no skill. This malware-as-a-service is therefore likely to be used by many cybercriminals.FormBook malware is an information stealer that can log keystrokes, extract data from HTTP sessions and steal clipboard content. Via the connection to its C2 server, the malware can receive and run commands and can download files, including other malware variants. Malware variants discovered to have already been downloaded by FormBook include the NanoCore RAT.FireEye researchers also point out that the malware can steal passwords and cookies, start and stop Windows processes, and force a reboot of an infected device.FormBook malware is being spread via spam email campaigns using compressed file attachments (.zip, .rar), .iso and .ace files in South Korea, while the attacks in the United States have mostly involved .doc, .xls and .pdf files. Large scale spam campaigns have been conducted to spread the malware in both countries.The U.S campaigns detected by FireEye used spam emails related to shipments sent via DHL and FedEx – a common choice for cybercriminals. The shipment labels, which the emails say must be printed in order to collect the packages, are in PDF form. Hidden in the document is a tny.im URL that directs victims to a staging server that downloads the malware. The campaigns using Office documents deliver the malware via malicious macros. The campaigns conducted in South Korea typically include the executables in the attachments.While the manufacturing industry and aerospace/defense contractors are being targeted, attacks have been conducted on a wide range of industries, including education, services/consulting, energy and utility companies, and the financial services. All organizations, regardless of their sector, should be alert to this threat.Organizations can protect against this new threat by adopting good cybersecurity best practices such as implementing a spam filtering solution to block malicious messages and stop files such as ISOs and ACE files from being delivered to end users. Organizations should also alert their employees to the threat of attack and provide training to help employees recognize this spam email campaign. Macros should also be disabled on all devices if they are not necessary for general work duties, and at the very least, should be set to be run manually. by titanadmin | Sep 29, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News | A warning has been issued to digital civil liberties activists by the Electronic Frontier Foundation about the risk of targeted spear phishing attacks. The phishing warning comes after spate of phishing attacks on digital civil liberties groups over the summer, at least one of which resulted in the disclosure of login credentials.The attacks were directed at two NGOs – Free Press and Fight for Future – both of which are advocates of net neutrality. The campaign appears to have been conducted by the same individual and included at least 70 phishing attempts between July and August. The attacks started on July 12, which is Save Net Neutrality Day of Action – a day of protest against the FCC’s proposed rollback of net neutrality protections.While phishing emails are often sent with the purpose of installing malware, in this case the aim was to obtain login credentials to LinkedIn, Google, and Dropbox accounts.Spear phishing emails were sent using a variety of themes from standard phishing emails to sophisticated and highly creative scams. While most of the attempts failed, the scammer was able to obtain the credentials of at least one account. The compromised Google account was used to send further spear phishing emails to other individuals in the organization. It is unclear what other goals the attacker had, and what the purpose of gaining access to the accounts was.The phishing campaign was analysed by Eva Galperin and Cooper Quintin at the Electronic Frontier Foundation. They said some of the phishing emails were simple phishing attempts, where the attacker attempted to direct end users to a fake Google document. Clicking the link would direct the user to a site where they were required to enter their Google account details to view the document. Similar phishing emails were sent in an attempt to obtain LinkedIn credentials, using fake LinkedIn notifications. Others contained links to news stories that appeared to have been shared by contacts.As the campaign progressed, the attacker got more inventive and the attacker started researching the targets and using personal information in the emails. One email was sent in which the scammer pretended to be the target’s husband, signing the email with his name.  Another email was sent masquerading as a hateful comment on a video the target had uploaded to YouTube.A pornography-related phishing scam was one of the most inventive attempts to gain access to login credentials. Emails were sent to targets masquerading as confirmations from well-known pornographic websites such as Pornhub and RedTube. The emails claimed the recipient had subscribed to the portals.The initial email was then followed up with a further email containing a sexually explicit subject line. The sender name was spoofed to make it appear that the email was sent from Pornhub. The unsubscribe link on the email directed the user to a Google login page where they were asked for their credentials.It is not clear whether the two NGOs were the only organizations targeted. Since these attacks may be part of a wider campaign, EFF is alerting all digital civil liberties activists to be aware of the threat. Indicators of compromise have been made available here. by titanadmin | Sep 29, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | A new malware threat named RedBoot has been discovered that bears some similarities to NotPetya. Like NotPetya, RedBoot malware appears to be a form of ransomware, when in actual fact it is a wiper at least in its current form.RedBoot malware is capable of encrypting files, rendering them inaccessible. Encrypted and given the .locked extension. Once the encryption process is completed, a ‘ransom’ note is shown to the user, providing an email address to use to find out how to unlock the encrypted files. Like NotPetya, RedBoot malware also makes changes to the master boot record.RedBoot includes a module that overwrites the current master boot record and it also appears that changes are made to the partition table, but there is currently no mechanism for restoring those changes. There is also no command and control server and even though an email address is provided, no ransom demand appears to be issued. RedBoot is therefore a wiper, not ransomware.According to Lawrence Abrams at BeepingComputer who has obtained a sample of the malware and performed an analysis, RedBoot is most likely a poorly designed ransomware variant in the early stages of development. Abrams said he has been contacted by the developer of the malware who claimed the version that was studied is a development version of the malware. He was told an updated version will be released in October. How that new version will be spread is unknown at this stage.Even if it is the intention of the developer to use this malware to extort money from victims, at present the malware causes permanent damage. That may change, although this malware variant may remain a wiper and be used simply to sabotage computers.It is peculiar that an incomplete version of the malware has been released and advance notice has been issued about a new version that is about to be released, but it does give businesses time to prepare.The attack vector is not yet known, so it is not possible to give specific instructions on how to prevent RedBoot malware attacks. The protections that should be put in place are therefore the same as for blocking any malware variant.A spam filtering solution should be implemented to block malicious emails, users should be alerted to the threat of phishing emails and should be training how to identify malicious emails and told never to open attachments or click on hyperlinks sent from unknown individuals.IT teams should ensure all computers and servers are fully patched and that SMBv1 has been disabled or SMBv1 vulnerabilities have been addressed and antivirus software should be installed on all computers.It is also essential to back up all systems to ensure that in the event of an attack, systems can be restored and data recovered. by titanadmin | Sep 27, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Ransomware developers have leveraged the EternalBlue exploit, now the criminals behind the Retefe banking Trojan have added the NSA exploit to their arsenal.The EternalBlue exploit was released in April by the hacking group Shadow Brokers and was used in the global WannaCry ransomware attacks. The exploit was also used, along with other attack vectors, to deliver the NotPetya wiper and more recently, has been incorporated into the TrickBot banking Trojan.The Retefe banking Trojan is distributed via malicious Microsoft Office documents sent via spam email. In order for the Trojan to be installed, the emails and the attachments must be opened and code must be run. The attackers typically use Office documents with embedded objects which run malicious PowerShell code if clicked. Macros have also been used in some campaigns to deliver the malicious payload.Researchers at Proofpoint have now obtained a sample of the Retefe banking Trojan that includes the EternalBlue SMBv1 exploit. The EternalBlue module downloads a PowerShell script and an executable. The script runs the executable, which installs the Trojan.The researchers noted the module used in the WannaCry attacks that allowed rapid propagation within networks – Pseb – was lacking in Retefe, although that may be added at a later date. It would appear that the criminals behind the campaign are just starting to experiment with EternalBlue.Other banking Trojans such as Zeus have been used in widespread attacks, although so far attacks using the Retefe banking Trojan have largely been confined to a limited number of countries – Austria, Sweden, Switzerland, Japan, and the United Kingdom.Businesses in these countries will be vulnerable to Retefe, although due to the number of malware variants that are now using EternalBlue, all businesses should ensure they mitigate the threat. Other malware variants will almost certainly be upgraded to include EternalBlue.Mitigating the threat from EternalBlue (CVE-2017-0144) includes applying the MS17-010 patch and also blocking traffic associated with the threat through your IDS system and firewall. Even if systems have been patched, a scan for vulnerable systems should still be conducted to ensure no devices have been missed.Since the Retefe Trojan is primarily being spread via spam email, a spam filter should be implemented to prevent malicious messages from reaching end users. By implementing SpamTitan, businesses can protect their networks against this and other malware threats delivered via spam email. by titanadmin | Sep 20, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | A new spam email ransomware campaign has been launched that has potential to infect users twice, with both Locky and FakeGlobe ransomware.The campaign, which was launched earlier this month, sees the attackers alternate the payload between Locky and FakeGlobe ransomware. The researchers that discovered the campaign suggest the payload alternates each hour.This method of distribution cpould result in victims being infected twice, first having their files encrypted by Locky ransomware, and then re-encrypted by FakeGlobe ransomware or vice versa. In such cases, two ransom payments would have to be paid if files could not be recovered from backups.While the use of two malware variants for spam email campaigns is not new, it is much more typical for different forms of malware to be used, such as pairing a keylogger with ransomware. In such cases, if the ransom is paid to unlock data, the keylogger would likely remain and allow data to be stolen for use in further attacks.As with previous attacks involving Locky, this double ransomware campaign involves fake invoices – one of the most effective ways of getting business users to open infected email attachments. In this campaign, the attachment claims to be the latest invoice which takes the form of a zip file. Opening that zip file and clicking to open the extracted file launches a script that downloads the malicious payload.The emails also contain a hyperlink with the text “View Your Bill Online,” which will download a PDF file containing the same script as the attachment, although it connects to different URLs.This campaign is widespread, being distributed in more than 70 countries with the large-scale spam campaign involving hundreds of thousands of messages.Infections with Locky and FakeGlobe ransomware see a wide range of file types encrypted and there is no free decryptor to unlock the infections. Victims must either restore their files from backups or pay the ransom to recover their data.If businesses are targeted, they can easily see multiple users fall for the campaigns, requiring multiple computers to be decrypted. However, since ransomware can spread across networks, all it takes is for one user to be fooled into downloading the ransomware for entire systems to be taken out of action. If data cannot be recovered from backups, multiple ransom payments will need to be made.Good backup policies will help protect businesses against file loss and prevent them from having to pay ransoms; although, even if backups exist, organizations can experience considerable downtime while the malware is removed, files are restored, and networks are analyzed for other malware infections and backdoors.Spam email remains the vector of choice for distributing ransomware. Organizations can reduce the risk of ransomware attacks by implementing an advanced spam filter such as SpamTitan. SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam emails, preventing malicious emails from reaching end users’ inboxes.While most organizations are now using spam filtering software to prevent attacks, a recent study conducted by PhishMe suggests 15% of businesses are still not using email gateway filtering, leaving them at a high risk of ransomware attacks. Given the volume of phishing and ransomware emails now being sent, email filtering solutions are a necessity. by titanadmin | Sep 15, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Consumers should be wary of Equifax phishing scams in the wake of the massive data breach announced earlier this month. The 143 million records potentially stolen in the breach will be monetized, which means many will likely be sold to scammers.Trend Micro has suggested a batch of data of this scale could easily be sold for $27 million on underground marketplaces and there would be no shortage of individuals happy to pay for the data. The records include the exact types of information that is sought by identity thieves, phishers, and scammers.However, it is not necessary to have access to the stolen records to pull of scams. Many opportunistic cybercriminals are taking advantage of consumer interest in the breach and are preparing phishing websites to fool the unwary into revealing their sensitive information. Equifax’s response to the breach has also made it easier for phishers to ply their trade.Equifax has taken the decision not to inform all breach victims by mail. Only the 209,000 individuals whose credit card numbers were exposed will be receiving a breach notification letter in the mail. All the remaining breach victims will have to check the Equifax website to find out if their information was compromised in the breach. With almost half the population affected, and next to no one being directly informed, virtually the entire population of the United States will need to head online to find out if they have been affected by the breach.Equifax has set up a new domain where information is provided to consumers on the steps they can take to secure their accounts and minimize the risk of financial harm. The official website is equifaxsecurity2017.com. Via this website, U.S consumers can get regular updates and enroll in the free credit monitoring services being offered.To obtain the free credit monitoring services, consumers will be routed to a website with the domain trustedidpremier.com and will need to enter their name and the last six digits of their social security number to start the process. Cybercriminals have been quick to take advantage and have registered swathes of websites and are using them to phish for sensitive information.USA Today reports that 194 domains closely resembling the site used by Equifax have already been registered in the past few days. Those domains closely mimic the site used by Equifax, with transposed letters and common typos likely to be made by careless typists. Many of the sites have already been shut down, but more are likely to be registered.The purpose of these sites is simple. To obtain sensitive information such as names, addresses, Social Security numbers and dates of birth.The technique is called typosquatting. It is extremely common and very effective. The websites use the same logos and layouts as the genuine sites and they fool many visitors into revealing their sensitive information. Links to the websites are sneaked into malicious adverts displayed via third-party ad networks and are emailed out in large scale phishing campaigns. Consumers should therefore exercise extreme caution and be alert to Equifax phishing scams sent via email and text message.Consumers should also be careful about revealing sensitive information online and should treat all email attachments and emailed hyperlinks as potentially malicious. Consumers should look for the warning signs of phishing attacks in any email received, especially if it appears to have been sent from Equifax or another credit monitoring bureau, a credit card company, bank or credit union. Email, text messages and telephone scams are likely to be rife following an attack on this scale.Additionally, all U.S. citizens should closely monitor their credit and bank accounts, Explanation of Benefits Statements, and check their credit reports carefully. Criminals already have access to a large amount of data and will be using that information for identity theft and fraud over the coming days, weeks, months and years. by titanadmin | Sep 14, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Cyberattacks on Office 365 users are increasing and Office 365 email security controls are not preventing account compromises at many businesses. If you want to block phishing and malware attacks and prevent costly data breaches, there is no better time than the present to improve Office 365 email security.Microsoft’s figures suggest there are now more than 70 million active users of Office 365 making it the most widely adopted enterprise cloud service by some distance. 78% of IT decision makers say they have already signed up to Office 365 or plan to do so in 2017 and Microsoft says it is now signing up a further 50,000 small businesses to Office 365 every month. 70% of Fortune 500 companies are already using Office 365 and the number of enterprises transitioning to Office 365 is likely to significantly increase.Office 365 offers many advantages for businesses but as the number of users grows, the platform becomes and even bigger target for hackers. Hackers are actively seeking flaws in Office 365 and users of the service are increasingly coming under attack. The more users an operating system or service has, the more likely hackers are to concentrate their resources on developing new methods to attack that system.Microsoft is well aware of the problem. Its figures show that malware attacks on Office 365 users increased by a staggering 600% last year and a recent survey conducted by Skyhigh Networks showed 71.4% of Office 365 business users have to deal with at least one compromised email account every month. Surveys often overestimate security problems due to having a limited sample size. That is unlikely to be the case here. The survey was conducted on 27 million users of Office 365 and 600 enterprises.The majority of new malware targets Windows systems simply because there are substantially more users of Windows than Macs. As Apple increases its market share, it becomes more profitable to develop malware to attack MacOS. Consequently, MacOS malware is becoming more common. The same is true for Office 365. More users means successful attacks are much more profitable. If a flaw is found and a new attack method developed, it can be used on millions of users, making searching for flaws and developing exploits well worth the time and effort.Phishers and hackers are also studying how the security functions of O365 work and are searching for flaws and developing exploits to take advantage. For a few dollars a month, hackers can sign up for accounts to study Office 365. Hackers are also taking advantage of poor password choices to gain access to other users’ accounts to trial their phishing campaigns to ensure they bypass Office 365 email security controls.Given the resources available to Microsoft and its frequent updates, you would expect Office 355 email security to be pretty good. While Office 365 email security is not terrible, for standard users it is not great either. Standard subscriptions include scant security features. To get enhanced security, the enterprise subscription must be purchased or extra email security add-ons must be purchased separately at a not insignificant cost.Pay for the enterprise subscription and you will get a host of extra security features provided through the Advanced Threat Protection (ATP) security package. This includes message sandboxing, phishing protection, URL tracking and reporting, and link reputation checking. Even when Advanced Threat Protection is used, getting the settings right to maximize protection is not always straightforward.APT will certainly improve email security, but it is worth bearing in mind that hackers can also sign up for those features and have access to the sandbox. That makes it easier for them to develop campaigns that bypass Office 365 security protections.Even with both layers of security, the level of protection against malware and phishing is only OK. A 2017 study by SE Labs revealed that even with Microsoft’s Exchange Online Protection and Advanced Threat Protection enabled, email security only achieved a similar score to solutions in the low-middle level of the market. Far lower than the level of protection provided by advanced third party email spam filters such as SpamTitan that work alongside Office 365 to provide even greater protection from malicious email threats.The cost of mitigating a cyberattack can be considerable, and certainly substantially more than the cost of prevention. The Ponemon Institute/IBM Security 2017 Cost of a Data Breach study shows the average cost of mitigating a cyberattack is $3.62 million.The recent NotPetya and WannaCry attacks also highlighted the high cost of breach mitigation. The NotPetya attack on Maersk, for example, has been estimated to cost the company up to $300 million, the vast majority of which could have been saved if the patches released by Microsoft in March had been applied promptly.These large companies can absorb the cost of mitigating cyberattacks to a certain extent, although smaller businesses simply do not have the funds. It is no therefore no surprise that 60% of SMBs end up permanently closing their doors within 6 months of experiencing a cyberattack. Even cash-strapped businesses should be able to afford to improve security to prevent email-based attacks – The most common vector used by cybercriminals to gain access to systems and data.No system can be made totally impervious to hackers and remain usable, but it is possible to improve Office 365 email security and reduce the potential for attacks to an minimal level. To do that, many enterprises are turning to third-party solution providers – specialists in email security – to increase Office 365 email security instead of paying extra for the protection offered by APT.According to figures from Gartner, an estimated 40% of Microsoft Office 365 deployments will incorporate third-party tools by the end of 2018 with the figure predicted to rise to half of all deployments by 2020.One of the best ways of improving Office 365 email security is to use an advanced, comprehensive email spam filtering solution developed by a specialist in email security, TitanHQ.TitanHQ’s SpamTitan offers excellent protection against email-based attacks. The solution has also been developed to perfectly compliment Office 365 to block more attacks and keep inboxes spam and malware free. SpamTitan filters out more than 99.97% of spam and malicious emails, giving businesses the extra level of protection they need. Furthermore, it is also one of the most cost-effective enterprise email security solutions for Office 365 on the market.Even with Office 365 Advanced Threat Protection, there are areas where Office 365 does not perform well. According to a study by Osterman Research, Office 365 is capable of blocking all known malware threats. The solution is nowhere near as effective at blocking new malware variants, which are constantly being released. When these new threats are detected and the signatures are added to the database, the threats can be blocked. Until that point, users will be vulnerable. SpamTitan on the other hand is capable of detecting and blocking new malware threats.  SpamTitan is able to anticipate new attacks thanks to pattern learning and intelligence. These predictive capabilities ensures protection against the latest malware variants that signature-based email security solutions fail to detect. By using Bayesian analysis, heuristics and machine learning, new types of spear phishing, whaling, and zero day attacks can be detected and blocked that would otherwise be delivered to inboxes.SpamTitan includes URL reputation analysis to assess all embedded hyperlinks in an email, including shortened URLs. SURBL filtering and URL detection mechanisms offer superior protection against malicious links contained in emails. Heuristics are used to identify phishing emails from message headers and are constantly updated to detect the latest emerging threats. SpamTitan also includes a greylisting option. Greylisting involves the rejection of all messages along with a request for the message to be resent. Most email servers respond and redeliver messages quickly. Email servers used for spamming are usually busy and these requests are ignored. This is included as an optional feature in SpamTitan, and can be used in combination with whitelists to ensure trusted senders’ messages are always delivered without any delay. Spam confidence levels can be set by user, user group or domain and the solution integrates with Active Directory and LDAP for easy synchronization.These combinations of features provide superior protection against phishing, spear phishing, ransomware, malware, BEC, impersonation, and zero-day attacks via email, ensuring businesses are protected and messages do not reach end users’ inboxes.To find out more about SpamTitan and how it can improve Microsoft Office 365 email security at your business, contact TitanHQ today.The days when MSPs could offer out of the box email services to clients and make big bucks are sadly gone. MSPs can sell Office 365 subscriptions to their clients, but the margins are small and there is little money to be made. However, there are good opportunities for selling support services for MS products and also for providing enhanced email security for Office 365 users.SpamTitan can be sold as an add-on service to enhance security for clients subscribing to Office 365, and since the solution is easy to implement and has a very low management overhead, it allows MSPs to easily boost monthly revenues.SpamTitan can also be provided in white label form; ready to accept MSP branding. The solution can even be hosted within an MSPs infrastructure. On top of that, there are generous margins for MSPs.With SpamTitan it is easy for MSPs to provide valued added service, enhance Office 365 email services, and improve Microsoft Office 365 email security for all customers.To find out more about how you can partner with SpamTitan and improve Office 365 email security for your customers, contact the MSP Sales team at TitanHQ today. by titanadmin | Sep 8, 2017 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software, Website Filtering | Dropbox phishing attacks are relatively common and frequently fool employees into revealing their sensitive information or downloading malware.Dropbox is a popular platform for sharing files and employees are used to receiving links advising them that files have been shared with them by their colleagues and contacts and phishers are taking advantage of familiarity with the platform.There are two main types of Dropbox phishing attacks. One involves sending a link that asks users to verify their email address. Clicking the link directs them to a spoofed Dropbox website that closely resembles the official website. They are then asked to enter in their login credentials as part of the confirmation process.Dropbox phishing attacks are also used to deliver malware such as banking Trojans and ransomware. A link is sent to users relating to a shared file. Instead of accessing a document, clicking the link will result in malware being downloaded.Over the past few days, there has been a massive campaign using both of these attack methods involving millions of spam email messages. Last week, more than 23 million messages were sent in a single day.Most of the emails were distributing Locky ransomware, with a smaller percentage used to spread Shade ransomware. There is no free decryptor available to unlock files encrypted by Locky and Shade ransomware. If files cannot be recovered from backups, victioms will have to dig deep.Due to the rise in value of Bitcoin of late the cost of recovery is considerable. The malicious actors behind these attacks are demanding 0.5 Bitcoin per infected device – Around $2,400. For a business with multiple devices infected, recovery will cost tens if not hundreds of thousands of dollars.According to F-Secure, the majority of malware-related spam messages detected recently – 90% – are being used to distribute Locky. Other security researchers have issued similar reports of a surge in Locky infections and spam email campaigns.To prevent Locky ransomware attacks, businesses should install an advanced spam filtering solution to prevent malicious emails from being delivered to end users’ inboxes. Occasional emails are likely to make it past spam filtering defenses so it is important that all users receive security awareness training to help them identify malicious emails.A web filter can be highly effective at blocking attempts to visit malicious websites where malware is downloaded, while up to date antivirus and anti-malware solutions can detect and quarantine malicious files before they are opened.Backups should also be made of all data and systems and those backups should be stored on an air-gapped device. Ransomware variants such as Locky can delete Windows Shadow Volume Copies and if a backup device remains connected, it is probable that backup files will also be encrypted.Best practices for backing up data involve three backup files being created, on two different media, with one copy stored offsite and offline. Backups should also be tested to make sure files can be recovered in the event of disaster.The increase in ransomware attacks has prompted the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to develop new guidance (NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 1800-11) on recovering from ransomware attacks and other disasters. The draft guidance can be downloaded on this link. by titanadmin | Aug 29, 2017 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | Defray ransomware is being used in targeted attacks on organizations in the healthcare and education sectors. The new ransomware variant is being distributed via email; however, in contrast to many ransomware campaigns, the emails are not being sent out in the millions. Rather than use the spray and pay method of distribution, small campaigns are being conducted consisting of just a few emails.To increase the likelihood of infection, the criminals behind Defray ransomware are carefully crafting messages to appeal to specific victims in an organization. Researchers at Proofpoint have captured emails from two small campaigns, one of which incorporates hospital logos in the emails and claims to have been sent by the Director of Information Management & Technology at the targeted hospital.The emails contain an Microsoft Word attachment that appears to be a report for patients, relatives and carers. The patient report includes an embedded OLE packager shell object. If clicked, this executable downloads and installs Defray ransomware, naming it after a legitimate Windows file.The ransom demand is considerable. Victims are asked to pay $5,000 per infected machine for the keys to unlock the encryption, although the ransom note does suggest the attackers are prepared to negotiate on price. The attackers suggest victims should backup their files to avoid having to pay ransoms in the future.There is no known decryptor for defray ransomware. Files are encrypted using AES-256 with RAS-2048 used to encrypt the AES-256 encrypted password while SHA-2 is used to maintain file integrity. In addition to encrypting files, the ransomware variant can cause other disruption and will delete volume shadow copies to prevent the restoration of files without paying the ransom.The developers of the ransomware have not given their malicious code a name and in contrast to most ransomware variants, the extensions of encrypted files are not changed. Proofpoint named the variant Defray ransomware from the C2 server used by the attackers.A second campaign has been identified targeting the manufacturing and technology sector. In this case, the email appears to have been sent by a UK aquarium (Sea Life) with facilities around the world. The emails and attachments differ, although the same OLE packager shell object is used to infect end users.The attackers have been sending these malicious emails to individuals, user groups and distribution lists. Attacks have occurred in both the United States and United Kingdom and are likely to continue.Protecting against these targeted attacks requires a combination of spam filtering technology and end user training. Organizations in the healthcare, education, technology and manufacturing sectors should consider sending an email alert to end users warning of the risk of ransomware attacks, instructing end users to exercise caution and not to open email attachments from unknown senders and never to click to enable content on email attachments. by titanadmin | Aug 29, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News | Scenes of the devastation caused by Hurricane Harvey are all over the newsstands and Internet. Videos of the devastation are being broadcast around the globe. The hurricane hit the Texas coast two days ago, forcing tens of thousands of Texas residents to flee their homes. While the hurricane has now been downgraded to a tropical storm, meteorologists are predicting the heavy rainfall will continue at lease for a couple more days and flood waters are continuing to rise.Following any natural disaster, email scams are rife and extra care must be taken. Hurricane Harvey is no exception. While homeowners were preparing for the worst, cybercriminals were developing Hurricane Harvey phishing scams to fool the unwary into revealing their sensitive information or downloading malware.Just as looters take advantage of abandoned homes, scammers take advantage of interest in the disaster and send malicious emails that direct users to phishing websites and exploit kits that silently download malware. Scammers capitalize on interest in disasters to conduct malicious activities.The expected deluge of malicious emails has prompted US-CERT to issue a warning about Hurricane Harvey phishing scams, urging Americans to be extra vigilant. Similar warnings have also been issued by the Better Business Bureau and Federal Trade Commission (FTC).Hurricane Harvey phishing scams are likely to have eye-catching subject lines offering updates on Hurricane Harvey and stories relating to the disaster or relief efforts. The scam emails contain malicious hyperlinks that will direct users to phishing websites and sites where malware is downloaded. Malicious email attachments are also used to install malware and ransomware.Users should be extremely wary about opening any emails relating to Hurricane Harvey, especially emails sent from unknown senders. The best advice is not to click on any hyperlink in an email relating to Hurricane Harvey and not to open email attachments sent in those messages.While email is favored by many scammers, Hurricane Harvey phishing scams can be found on social media sites. Facebook posts and tweets may direct users to phishing websites where credit card details can be obtained or to fake charity websites where donations can be made.A natural disaster such as this causes devastation for tens of thousands of families. Homes and businesses are lost and families are forced to take refuge in shelters. Displaced families need support and many charities are accepting donations to help the victims.However, all may not be as it seems. Scammers spoof legitimate charities and set up bogus websites where donations can be made. Oftentimes, legitimate charities are spoofed and donations never make it to the victims.The advice offered by the Federal Trade Commission is to be wary of any request for donations to support the victims of Hurricane Harvey. Rather than respond directly to email and social media requests for donations, visit the charity webpage directly and independently verify the charity is legitimate.The Better Business Bureau is maintaining a list of BBB-accredited charities that are accepting donations to support the victims of Hurricane Harvey, as is Guidestar. By checking the legitimacy of the charity, users can make sure their donations reach the victims of the hurricane and do not end up lining criminals’ pockets.If you are considering donating to a charity that is not on either list, before making a donation, check that the charity is registered by contacting the National Association of State Charity Officials. by titanadmin | Aug 24, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | What is biggest cybersecurity threat currently faced by organizations? According to a recent survey of government IT professionals, the biggest cybersecurity threat is employees. 100% of respondents to the survey said employees were the biggest cybersecurity threat faced by their organziation.The survey, conducted by Netwrix, explored IT security and compliance risks at a wide range of organizations around the globe, including government agencies.Government agencies are an attractive target for cybercriminals. They store vast quantities of sensitive data on consumers and cybersecurity protections are often inferior to private sector organizations. Consequently, cyberattacks are easier to pull off. In addition to a treasure trove of consumer data, government agencies hold highly sensitive information critical to national security. With access to that information, hackers can take out critical infrastructure.There are plenty of hackers attempting to gain access to government networks and oftentimes attacks are successful. The Office of Personnel Management breach in 2015 resulted in the Social Security numbers of 21.5 million individuals being compromised. In 2015, there was also a 6.2 million record breach at the Georgia Secretary of State Office and 191 million individuals were affected by a hack of the U.S. voter database.The survey revealed 72% of government entities around the world had experienced at least one data breach in 2016 and only 14% of respondents felt their department was well protected against cyberattacks.Last year, 57% of data breaches at government entities were caused by insider error, while 43% of respondents from government agencies said they had investigated instances of insider misuse. Given the high percentage of security incidents caused by insiders – deliberate and accidental – it is no surprise that insiders are perceived to be the biggest cybersecurity threat.Employees may be widely regarded as liabilities when it comes to information security, but that need not be the case. With training, employees can be turned into security titans. For that to happen, a onetime security awareness training program is not going to cut it. Creating a security culture requires considerable effort, resources and investment.Security awareness training needs to be a continuous process with training sessions for employees scheduled at least twice a year, with monthly updates and weekly security bulletins distributed to highlight the latest threats. Training must also be backed up with testing – both to determine how effective training has been and to provide employees with the opportunity to test their skills. Phishing simulations are highly effective in this regard. If an employee fails a simulation it can be turned into a training opportunity. Studies by security training companies have shown susceptibility to phishing attacks can be reduced by more than 90% with effective training and phishing simulation exercises.However, fail to invest in an effective security awareness program and employees will remain the biggest cybersecurity threat and will continue to cause costly data breaches.With the workforce trained to respond correctly to phishing emails, employees can be turned into a formidable last line of defense. The defensive line should be tested with simulated phishing emails, but technological solutions should be introduced to prevent real phishing emails from being delivered to end users’ inboxes.The majority of malware and ransomware attacks start with a phishing email, so it is essential that these malicious messages are filtered out. An advanced spam filtering solution should therefore be at the heart of an organization’s email defenses.SpamTitan is a highly effective enterprise-class spam filtering solution that blocks malicious messages and more than 99.9% of spam email, helping organizations to mount an impressive defense against email-based attacks. Dual anti-virus engines are used to identity and block malware and ransomware, with each email subjected to deep analysis using Sender Policy Framework (SPF), SURBL’s, RBL’s and Bayesian analysis to block threats.If you want to improve your defenses against phishing and email-based malware attacks, SpamTitan should be at the heart of your email defenses. To find out more about SpamTitan and how it can prevent your employees having their phishing email identification skills frequently put to the test, contact the TitanHQ team today. by titanadmin | Aug 23, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | The busiest day of the week for email spam is Tuesday and spammers concentrate on sending messages during working hours, Monday to Friday, according to a 2017 spam study conducted by IBM X-Force.The study was conducted over a 6-month period from December 2016 to June 2017. The study analyzed more than 20 million spam messages and 27 billion webpages and images a day. The researchers also incorporated data provided by several anti-spam organizations, making the 2017 spam study one of the largest ever conducted.The 2017 spam study showed the majority of spam emails – 83% – were sent to arrive in inboxes during office hours with Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday the spammiest days. Spam volume was much lower on Mondays and Fridays.While spam is sent 24/7, the busiest times are between 1am and 4pm ET. If an email arrives at an inbox when a worker is at his/her desk, it is more likely to be opened. Spammers therefore concentrate their messages during office hours.Malicious spam messages increase around the holidays and during tax season when email scams are rife. The increase in numbers of individuals heading online to shop for goods means rich pickings for spammers. Spam volume also increases during sporting events such as the Olympics, the Super Bowl and the Football World Cup, with sports-themed spam messages capitalizing on interest in the events.Malicious messages aim to get email recipients to reveal their banking credentials, logins and passwords and install malware. The researchers found 44% of spam emails contained malicious code, and out of those emails, 85% were used to spread ransomware.While the majority of spam messages are automated, the IBM researchers point out that spammers work at their campaigns. There is also considerable manual work required to control botnets and spam mailers. The process is not entirely automated. Considerable work is put into malicious messages that spread ransomware and malware, with these campaigns requiring the highest level of manual control. These campaigns also involve extensive planning to maximize the number of victims.Spam is sent from countries all around the world, although the biggest percentage hails from India, which sends 30% of all spam emails. South America and China also send a high percentage of global spam. Only 7% of spam emails are sent from the United States and Canada.Companies are getting better at filtering out spam emails and preventing the messages from reaching inboxes. Spam filtering technology has improved enormously in recent years, meaning fewer messages are being delivered; however, spam is still the main method of distributing malware and phishing scams are rife. Spammers are also getting much better at masking their malicious messages and they frequently change delivery vehicles develop new methods of hiding malicious code to avoid detection.The researchers say spam email volume has increased fourfold over the past 12 months and malicious messages are now being increasingly targeted at organizations and individuals, rather than being sent randomly in huge spamming campaigns. Targeting allows the attackers to send carefully crafted campaigns which are more likely to result in the recipients taking the desired action. by titanadmin | Aug 21, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Two new Locky ransomware spam campaigns have been detected this month, each being used to spread a new variant of the cryptoransomware. The campaigns have been launched after a relatively quiet period for ransomware attacks, although the latest campaigns show that the threat of ransomware attacks in never far away.Previously, Locky ransomware spam campaigns have been conducted using the Necurs botnet – one of the largest botnets currently in use. One of the campaigns, spreading the Locky variant Lukitus is being conducted via Necurs. The other campaign, which is spreading the Diablo Locky variant, is being sent via a new botnet consisting of more than 11,000 infected devices. Those devices are located in 133 countries according to Comodo Threat Research Labs. The botnet appears to have been built quickly and is understood to be growing, with most infected devices in Vietnam, India, Mexico, Turkey and Indonesia.The failure to backup files is likely to prove costly. The ransom demand issued by the attackers ranges between 0.5 and 1 Bitcoin per infected device – approximately $2,150 to $4,300 per machine. There is still no decryptor for Locky ransomware. Victims face file loss if they do not have a viable backup to restore files. Locky ransomware variants remove Shadow Volume Copies to hamper recovery without paying the ransom.The Diablo Locky variant renames encrypted files with a unique 16-character file name and adds the diablo6 extension, while the Lukitus variant adds the .lukitus extension.The two new Locky ransomware spam campaigns differ in their method of delivery of the ransomware, although both involve spam email. The Diablo campaign, which started on August 9, uses various attachments including pdf, doc, and docx files, although infection occurs via malicious macros.Opening the infected documents will present the user with indecipherable data and a prompt to enable macros to view the content of the document. Enabling macro saves a binary to the device, runs it, and downloads the Locky payload.The email subjects in this campaign are varied, although in many of the emails the attackers claim the attachment is a missed invoice or purchase order.The Lukitus campaign was first detected on August 16 and has been mostly used in attacks in the United States, UK, and Austria, although there have also been successful attacks in Italy, Sweden, China, Russia, Botswana, Netherlands and Latvia.This campaign uses zipped (zip and rar) attachments. The zip files contain JavaScript files, which if run, will download the Lukitus Locky variant.As with all ransomware attacks via spam email, the best defense is an advanced spam filter to block the emails and prevent them from being delivered to end users. Employees should already have been trained on the threat from ransomware. Now would be a good time to issue a reminder via email to all employees of the current threat.Recovery without paying the ransom depends on viable backup copies existing. Since Locky can encrypt backup files, backup devices should be disconnected after a backup has been made. Organizations should also ensure three copies of backups exist, on two different media, with one copy stored off site – the 3-2-1 approach to backing up. by titanadmin | Aug 18, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam Software, Website Filtering | The retail industry is under attack with cybercriminals increasing their efforts to gain access to PoS systems. Retail industry data breaches are now being reported twice as frequently as last year, according to a recent report from UK law firm RPC.Retailers are an attractive target. They process many thousands of credit card transactions each week and store huge volumes of personal information of consumers. If cybercriminals can gain access to Point of Sale systems, they can siphon off credit and debit card information and stolen consumer data can be used for a multitude of nefarious purposes.Many retailers lack robust cybersecurity defenses and run complex systems on aging platforms, making attacks relatively easy.While cyberattacks are common, the increase in data breaches does not necessarily mean hacks are on the rise. RPC points out that there are many possible causes of data breaches, including theft of data by insiders. Retailers need to improve they defenses against attacks by third parties, although it is important not to forget that systems need to be protected from internal threats.Preventing retail industry data breaches requires a range of cybersecurity protections, but technology isn’t always the answer. Errors made by staff can easily result in cybercriminals gaining easy access to systems, such as when employees respond to phishing emails.Employees are the last line of defense and that defensive line is frequently tested. It is therefore essential to improve security awareness. Security awareness training should be provided to all employees to raise awareness of the threat from phishing, malware and web-based attacks.Phishing emails are the primary method of spreading malware and ransomware. Training staff how to identify phishing emails – and take the correct actions when email-based threats are received – will go a long way toward preventing retail industry data breaches. Employees should be taught the security basics such as never opening email attachments or clicking hyperlinks in emails from unknown individuals and never divulging login credentials online in response to email requests.Employees can be trained to recognize email-based threats, although it is important to take steps to prevent threats from reaching inboxes. An advanced spam filtering solution is therefore a good investment. Spam filters can block the vast majority of spam and malicious emails, ensuring employees security awareness is not frequently put to the test. SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam and malicious emails, ensuring threats never reach inboxes.Web-based attacks can be blocked with a web filtering solution. By carefully controlling the types of websites employees can access, retailers can greatly reduce the risk of malware downloads.As the recent WannaCry and NotPetya malware attacks have shown, user interaction is not always required to install malware. Both of those global attacks were conducted remotely without any input from employees. Vulnerabilities in operating systems were exploited to download malware.In both cases, patches had been released prior to the attacks that would have protected organizations from the threat. Keeping software up to date is therefore essential. Patches must be applied promptly and regular checks conducted to ensure all software is kept 100% up to date.This is not only important for preventing retail industry data breaches. Next year, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) comes into force and heavy fines await retailers that fail to do enough to improve data security. Ahead of the May 25, 2018 deadline for compliance, retailers need to improve security to prevent breaches and ensure systems are in place to detect breaches rapidly when they do occur. by titanadmin | Aug 16, 2017 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | Several domain spoofing spam campaigns have been detected that are targeting customers of popular UK banks. The spam email campaigns include credible messages and realistic spoofed domains and pose a threat to consumers and businesses alike.  The domain spoofing email campaigns are targeting customers of HSBC, Lloyds Bank, Nationwide, NatWest and Santander.Domain spoofing is the use of a domain similar to that used by a legitimate entity with the aim of fooling email recipients into believing the email and domain is genuine. Domain spoofing is commonly used in phishing attacks, with email recipients fooled into divulging their login credentials or downloading malware. In addition to a similarly named domain, the malicious websites often include the targeted brand’s logos, layouts and color schemes.According to a warning issued by the SANS Institute’s Internet Storm Center, the latest domain spoofing spam campaigns involve the name of the bank and one of the following additional words: docs; documents; secure; communication; securemessage.Customers of a targeted back who receive an email and a link from the domain ‘securenatwest.co.uk’ or ‘santandersecuremessage.com’ could easily be fooled into thinking the email is genuine. Other domains being used are hsbcdocs.co.uk, hmrccommunication.co.uk, lloydsbacs.co.uk, nationwidesecure.co.uk, natwestdocuments6.ml, and santanderdocs.co.uk. Further, many consumers still believe a website starting with HTTPS is secure. Yet all of these spoofed domains are all encrypted and have SSL certificates.The domain spoofing spam campaigns involve messages claiming there is a new secure message from the bank along with an attached HTML file. That file downloads a malicious MS Office document containing macros. If those macros are enabled, the malicious payload is delivered. These campaigns are being used to distribute Trickbot malware – a banking Trojan used for man-in-the-middle attacks to steal banking credentials.HTML documents are used as they download malicious MS documents via an HTTPS connection to reduce the risk of the documents being detected by antivirus software. SANS Institute researcher Brad Duncan pointed out that this method, while not new, can be effective. He also explained that “poorly managed Windows hosts (or Windows computers using a default configuration) are susceptible to infection.”The domain spoofing spam campaigns were detected by My Online Security, which notes that “A very high proportion are being targeted at small and medium size businesses, with the hope of getting a better response than they do from consumers.”Businesses can reduce risk by employing a spam filtering solution to prevent the malicious messages from being delivered to end users, ensuring Windows hosts are correctly configured, and ensuring employees are alert to the threat. Macros should be disabled on all devices and employees instructed never to enable macros or enable content on emailed documents.If you are looking for the best spam filter for business users, be sure to check out SpamTitan – The leading anti-spam solution for SMBs and enterprises. Contact the TitanHQ team today for further information and a product demonstration. by titanadmin | Aug 14, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Security researchers have discovered a wave of cyberattacks on hotel WiFi networks that leverage an NSA exploit – EternalBlue – for a vulnerability that was fixed by Microsoft in March.The same exploit was used in the WannaCry ransomware attacks in May and the NotPetya wiper attacks in June. Even though the malware campaigns affected hundreds of companies and caused millions (if not billions) of dollars of losses, there are still companies that have yet to apply the update.The recent cyberattacks on hotel WiFi networks have affected establishments in the Middle East and Europe. Once access is gained to hotel networks, the attackers spy on guests via hotel WiFi networks and steal their login credentials.Researchers at FireEye discovered the new campaign, which they have attributed to the Russian hacking group APT28, also known as Fancy Bear. Fancy Bear is believed to receive backing from the Russian government and has performed many high profile cyberattacks in recent years, including the cyberattack on the World Anti-Doping agency (WADA). Following that attack, Fancy Bear published athletes’ therapeutic use exemption (TUE) data.In contrast to the WannaCry and NotPetya attacks that were conducted remotely without any user involvement, the latest campaign is being conducted via a spear phishing campaign. The hacking group sends malicious emails to hotel employees and uses email attachments to download their backdoor – Gamefish. In this case, the attachment appears to be a reservation form for a hotel booking. Gamefish is installed if hotel employees run the macros in the document.Once the backdoor is installed, the hackers search for internal and guest WiFi networks using EternalBlue and spread to other devices. Once embedded in computers that control the WiFi networks, the attackers can launch attacks on devices that attempt to connect to the hotel WiFi network.The hackers use the open-source Responder tool to listen for MBT-NS (UDP/137) broadcasts from devices that are attempting to connect to WiFi network resources. Instead of connecting, they connect to Responder which obtains usernames and hashed passwords. That information is transferred to a computer controlled by the attackers. Once the hashed passwords have been cracked they can be used to attack hotel guests.The names of the affected hotels have not been disclosed, although FireEye has confirmed that at least one Middle Eastern hotel and seven in Europe have been attacked. The hotels were well respected establishments likely to be frequented by high-net worth guests and business travellers.The advice for travellers is to exercise caution when connecting to hotel WiFi networks, such as avoiding accessing online bank accounts or better still, avoiding connecting to hotel WiFi networks altogether. While the use of a VPN when connecting to hotel WiFi networks is a good idea, in this case the attack can occur before a secure VPN connection is made.FireEye reports that this type of attack is difficult to detect and block. The attackers passively collect data and leave virtually no traces. Once login credentials have been obtained, guests are vulnerable and not just while they are at the hotel. FireEye believes the credentials are then used to attack individuals when they return home and connect to their home networks.The best way for hotels to prevent cyberattacks on hotel WiFi networks such as this is by blocking the phishing and spear phishing attacks that lead to installation of the malware. Hotels should ensure all employees are provided with security awareness training and a spam filtering solution such as SpamTitan is deployed to stop malicious emails from being delivered to employees’ inboxes. by titanadmin | Aug 9, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | Global spam email levels have been rising, with spam volume in July soaring to levels not seen since March 2015.The figures come from the Symantec monthly threat report, which uses data from the Global Intelligence Network (GIN). Last month, global spam email levels increased by 0.6 percentage points to 54.9% of total email volume. The industry that received the most spam emails was the mining sector, with 59.1% of emails categorized as spam.Spam emails include unsolicited marketing emails, offers of cut price medications and notices about women who have been trawling the internet for a man like you. While many of these emails are simply junk, the volume of malicious messages has been rising. In particular, spam messages containing malware.Symantec reports that email malware has increased to levels not seen since December 2016. Last month, one in every 359 spam emails was used to deliver malware. The previous month, one in every 451 emails contained malware. The industry that received the most email malware levels was the agriculture, forestry and fishing sector, with one in every 152 emails containing malware.Malicious emails are being sent in campaigns targeting medium sized businesses, which registered the highest percentage of malware emails. Businesses with between 251 and 500 employees had the highest volume of malware in their inboxes, according to Symantec’s analysis. Large businesses – organizations with between 1,001 and 1,500 employees – had the highest rate of spam delivery as a whole.While malware emails increased, the number of malware variants used in those emails dropped to 58.7 million variants from 66.3 million the previous month. Symantec notes that several malware families have now started being spread via email, which has contributed to the malware email volume.In the past month, malware variants have been detected that are capable of generating their own spam emails from the infected device and sending malware copies to the victims’ entire address books. The Emotet banking Trojan now has this functionality and Reyptson malware also, with the latter sending itself to Thunderbird contacts.This month, Microsoft has discovered a new tech support scam that is being distributed via spam email. Spam emails spoofing brands are being sent in large campaigns with links to websites that generate popups warning of suspicious activity and malware infections.Symantec notes the volume of phishing emails has also increased with levels now at a 12-month high. One in 1,968 emails are used for phishing. Phishing attacks on the mining industry sector were the most common with one in 1,263 emails used for phishing, indicating targeted attacks are occurring.The rise in global spam email levels highlights the need for an advanced email spam filter. Spam is a major drain on productivity and malware and phishing attacks are costly to mitigate. Employee security awareness programs are effective at preventing employees from falling for phishing scams, although a technological solution should be implemented to prevent spam emails from reaching inboxes. SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam and dual antivirus engines prevent the delivery of known malware.If you are looking for the best spam filter for business use and want to protect your users and network from malicious emails, contact the TitanHQ team today for more information on SpamTitan. by titanadmin | Jul 31, 2017 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A new survey from CSO shows ransomware and phishing attacks in 2017 have increased, although companies have reported a decline in the number of cyber incidents experienced over the past year. While it is certainly good news that organizations are experiencing fewer cyberattacks, the report suggests that the severity of the attacks has increased and more organizations have reported suffering losses as a result of security incidents.CSO conducted the annual U.S State of Cybercrime survey on 510 respondents, 70% of whom were at the vice president level or higher. Companies had an average IT security budget of $11 million.This year’s report suggests organizations are struggling to keep up with the number of patches and software upgrades now being issued, although the consequences of the delays have been clearly shown this year with the NotPetya and WannaCry attacks. The failure to patch promptly has seen many organizations attacked, with some companies still struggling to recover. Nuance Communications was badly affected by NotPetya, and a month after the attacks, only 75% of its customers have regained access to its services. TNT also suffered extensive disruption to services in the weeks following the attacks, although these are just two companies out of many to experience extended disruption.IT security budgets have increased by an average of 7.5% year over year with 10% of companies saying they have increased IT security spending by 20% or more in the past 12 months. While new technologies are taking up the bulk of the new budgets, organizations are also investing in audits and knowledge assessments, information sharing, redeveloping their cybersecurity strategy, policies and processes and are adding new skills. 67% of respondents said they have now expanded their security capabilities in include mobile devices, the cloud and IoT.Even though the threat of attack is severe, many companies still believe a cyber response plan should not be part of their cybersecurity strategy, although acceptance that cyberattacks will occur has seen 19% of respondents plan to implement a response strategy in the next 12 months.Even though there was a fall in the number of security incidents, losses experienced as a result of those attacks have remained constant or have increased over the past 12 months for 68% of respondents. Only 30% of companies said they had experienced no losses as a result of security incidents, down 6 percentage points from last year.More CSOs and CISOs are now reporting directly to the board on a monthly basis, up 17% since last year. However, as was also confirmed by a recent survey conducted by KPMG, many boards still view cybersecurity as an IT issue – The CSO survey suggests 61% of boards believe cybersecurity is a concern of the IT department not a matter for the board, a drop of just two percentage points since last year.Phishing attacks in 2017 have increased significantly, with 36% of companies reporting attacks – up from 26% last year. 17% of companies experienced ransomware attacks – up from 14% – and financial fraud increased from 7% to 12%. Business email compromise scams are also increasing, up from 5% to 9% in the past 12 months.The increase in ransomware and phishing attacks in 2017 highlights the need for security awareness training for employees and an improvement to spam filtering controls. Organizations need to ensure they have sufficient staffing levels to ensure patches are applied promptly, while investment in people must improve to ensure they have the skills, resources and training to respond to the latest threats.  Boards must also appreciate that cybersecurity is not just a matter for IT departments, and the CSO survey shows that too much faith is being placed in cybersecurity protections. Currently only 53% of companies are testing the effectiveness of their security programs. by titanadmin | Jul 21, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | Reyptson ransomware is a new threat that has been discovered in the past few days. The new ransomware variant is currently being used in attacks in Spain, with detected activity rising considerably in the days since its discovery.There is no free decryptor for Reyptson ransomware at this stage. The ransomware variant encrypts a wide range of file types, including MS Office files and images using AES-128 encryption. Encrypted files will have the file extension .Reyptson appended to the file.Infection will require files to be recovered from backups or the ransom demand must be paid if no backup exists and victims do not want permanent file loss. Users are told they must pay a ransom of €200 to unlock the encryption, although the payment will increase to €500 after 72 hours.New cryptoransomware variants are being released on an almost daily basis with the majority spread via spam email. What makes this variant unique is its ability to spread itself following infection. Reyptson is capable of conducting its own email campaigns and spreading itself to a victim’s contacts.The spam email campaigns are conducted via the Thunderbird email client. Reyptson ransomware searches for contacts and creates new spam email messages and sends them to all contacts using the victim’s credentials.The emails claim to be invoices and include a link for the recipient to download the invoice. Clicking the link will download a compressed .rar file which contains an executable file that appears to be a PDF file. If that executable file is opened; the user will be infected with the ransomware and the process will repeat. According to an analysis by MalwareHunterTeam, the emails have the subject line Folcan S.L. Facturación.Recently, global ransomware campaigns have been conducted using exploits stolen from the NSA. Those exploits take advantage of vulnerabilities in software that have not been addressed. Even though patches have been released to correct those vulnerabilities, many companies have yet to update their operating systems. A free scanner called Eternal Blues has been developed that has revealed more than 50,000 computers around the world are still vulnerable and have not been patched.Patching promptly has always been important, but now even more so. Delaying the updating of software can see organizations infected and the damage can be considerable. In the case of NotPetya, computers are rendered useless and even payment of a ransom cannot undo the damage.However, spam email remains the most common vector for spreading ransomware. Preventing Reyptson ransomware attacks and other cryptoransomware variants requires an advanced spam filter. A spam filter such as SpamTitan can block these messages and prevent them from being delivered to end users. If the spam emails are not delivered, they cannot be opened by end users.Prompt patching, user awareness training, spam and web filtering can help organizations reduce the risk of attack. However, it is also essential to ensure multiple backups of data are made to ensure recovery in case of infection. Organizations should adopt the 3-2-1 approach to backups. Ensure there are three copies of data, on 2 different media with one copy stored off site.One backup copy can be stored locally – on a removable device that is unplugged when backups are completed or are not being used. One copy should be stored in the cloud and one on a backup drive/tape that is stored in a secure location off site that can be used in the event of a disaster. by titanadmin | Jul 21, 2017 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice | Law firms in Eire and Northern Ireland are being targeted with a new Supreme Court phishing campaign that is being used to fool recipients into visiting a malicious website.The email appears to have been sent from the Supreme Court and refers to a new/updated Statutory Instrument. The emails that have been detected so far include a PDF file containing further details, although the attachment will divert the recipient to a malicious domain.The Supreme Court phishing emails add a sense of urgency, as is common in phishing campaigns, telling the recipient to read the information in the attached document by this Friday.The emails that have been reported have the subject line – Supreme Court (S.I. No691/2017) – although it is possible there are other variations along the same theme.  The Courts Service has confirmed that the emails are not genuine and should be deleted without being opened. The phishing scam has been reported to the Gardaí and the Courts Service IT team is also investigating and a warning has been issued.Supreme Court phishing scams are common. In February this year, the UK Supreme Court also issued a warning after numerous emails were received claiming to be subpoenas for court appearances in relation to a crime that the recipient had committed. In that case, a link was included to provide the court with all of the necessary information about the case. Receipents of the email were told to submit the information within 12 days or the case would proceed in their absence.As the UK Supreme Court pointed out, it does not issue subpoenas to appear in court for criminal cases, although many law-abiding citizens would be aware of typical procedures associated with criminal cases. The fear generated by a potential court appearance for an unknown crime would likely see many email recipients open the message, click on the link and reveal their personal information.The purpose of Supreme Court phishing emails is usually to obtain sensitive information under the guise of confirming the recipient’s identity. The information gathered by the phishing emails can be used for identity theft or other forms of fraud. Emails such as this are also used to spread malware or ransomware.The emails are designed to scare people into responding and they can be highly effective. However, there are usually a variety of telltale signs that the email is not genuine. Before clicking or taking any requested action, it is important to stop, think and not to panic. Check the email for misspellings, grammatical errors and anything out of the ordinary.If a link is included in the email, hover the mouse arrow over it to find out the true URL to see if it will direct you to a genuine domain. If the email contains an attachment, do not open it. If you are worried about the email, contact the organization that claims to have sent the message by obtaining the correct contact details from the Internet and verify the authenticity of the request.In the most part, any serious matter such as a subpoena or important change to legislation would be unlikely to be communicated via email, and certainly not in an email attachment or via a link to a domain.
 Reports of Internet users that have been caught out by email scams continue to increase. Whether it is drivers being told to pay speeding fines via a link on an email, or Facebook users being advised that they have violated the terms of their account, innocent victims continue to be ripped off by cybercriminals using email scams.
Business email compromise scams are also reported to have increased. These email scams involve the cybercriminal gaining access to a corporate email account – such as that of the CEO. An email is then sent apparently from the CEO to a member of the finance department requesting a bank transfer to the cybercriminal´s account. All too often the transfer is made without question.
Many email scams attempt to extract log-in credentials by asking the recipient of the email to log into an account to resolve an issue. The email contains a link to a bogus website, where the recipient keys in their username and password. In the case of the Facebook email scam, this gives the cybercriminal access to the recipient´s genuine account and all their social media contacts.
Many individuals use similar username and password combinations for multiple accounts and a cybercriminal could get the individual´s log-in credentials to all their online accounts (personal and work accounts) from just one scam email. Alternatively they could use the log-in credentials to infect the user´s accounts with malware.
To protect against email scams, security experts advise if you are contacted by email and asked to click a link, pay a fine, or open an attachment, assume it is a scam. Try to contact the individual sender or company supposed to have sent the email to confirm its authenticity. Do not use the contact information supplied in the email. Perform an Internet search to independently obtain the sender´s genuine contact details.
Other measures that can be taken to protect yourself from email scams include:

Carefully check the sender’s email. Does it look like it is genuine?
Never open email attachments from someone you do not know
If you receive an email offering you a prize or refund, stay safe and delete the email
Ensure anti-virus software is installed on your computer and is up to date.

Reports of Internet users that have been caught out by email scams continue to increase. Whether it is drivers being told to pay speeding fines via a link on an email, or Facebook users being advised that they have violated the terms of their account, innocent victims continue to be ripped off by cybercriminals using email scams.Business email compromise scams are also reported to have increased. These email scams involve the cybercriminal gaining access to a corporate email account – such as that of the CEO. An email is then sent apparently from the CEO to a member of the finance department requesting a bank transfer to the cybercriminal´s account. All too often the transfer is made without question.Many email scams attempt to extract log-in credentials by asking the recipient of the email to log into an account to resolve an issue. The email contains a link to a bogus website, where the recipient keys in their username and password. In the case of the Facebook email scam, this gives the cybercriminal access to the recipient´s genuine account and all their social media contacts.Many individuals use similar username and password combinations for multiple accounts and a cybercriminal could get the individual´s log-in credentials to all their online accounts (personal and work accounts) from just one scam email. Alternatively they could use the log-in credentials to infect the user´s accounts with malware.To protect against email scams, security experts advise if you are contacted by email and asked to click a link, pay a fine, or open an attachment, assume it is a scam. Try to contact the individual sender or company supposed to have sent the email to confirm its authenticity. Do not use the contact information supplied in the email. Perform an Internet search to independently obtain the sender´s genuine contact details.Other measures that can be taken to protect yourself from email scams include: by titanadmin | Oct 6, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Office 365 phishing attacks are commonplace, highly convincing, and Office 365 spam filtering controls are easily being bypassed by cybercriminals to ensure messages reach inboxes. Further, phishing forms are being hosted on webpages that are secured with valid Microsoft SLL certificates to convince users the websites are genuine.In the event of a phishing email making it past perimeter defenses and arriving in an inbox, there are several tell-tale signs that the email is not genuine.There are often spelling mistakes, incorrect grammar, and the messages are sent from questionable senders or domains. To improve the response rate, cybercriminals are now spending much more time carefully crafting their phishing emails and they are often virtually indistinguishable from genuine communications from the brand they are spoofing. In terms of formatting, they are carbon copies of genuine emails complete with the branding, contact information, sender details, and logos of the company being spoofed. The subject is perfectly believable and the content well written. The actions the user is requested to take are perfectly plausible.Hyperlinks are contained in emails that direct users to a website where they are required to enter their login credentials. At this stage of the phishing attack there are usually further signs that all is not as it seems. A warning may flash up that the website may not be genuine, the website may start with HTTP rather than the secure HTTPS, or the SSL certificate may not be owned by the company that the website is spoofing.Even these tell-tale signs are not always there, as has been shown is several recent Office 365 phishing attacks, which have the phishing forms hosted on webpages that have valid Microsoft SSL certificates or SSL certificates that have been issued to other cloud service providers such as CloudFlare, DocuSign, or Google.One recent phishing scam uses Azure blob storage to obtain a valid SSL certificate for the phishing form. Blob storage can be used for storing a variety of unstructured data. While it is possible to use HTTP and HTTPS, the phishing campaign uses the latter, which will show a signed SSL certificate from Microsoft.In this campaign, end users are sent an email with a button that must be clicked to view the content of a cloud-hosted document. In this case, the document appears to be from a Denver law firm. Clicking the button directs the user to an HTML page hosted on Azure blog storage that requires Office 365 credentials to be entered to view the document. Since the document is hosted on Azure blob storage, a Microsoft service, it has a valid SSL certificate that was issued to Microsoft adding legitimacy to the scam.Entering login credentials into the form will send them to the attackers. The user will then be directed to another webpage, most likely unaware that they have been phished.A similar campaign has been detected that abuses the CloudFlare IPFS gateway. Users can access content on the IPFS distributed file system through a web browser. When connecting to this gateway through a web browser, the HTML page will be secured with a CloudFlare SSL certificate. In this case, the login requires information to be entered including username, password, and recovery email address and phone number – which will be forwarded to the attacker, while the user will be directed to a PDF file unaware that their credentials have been stolen.Office 365 users are being targeted by cybercriminals as they know Office 365 phishing controls can be easily bypassed. Even with Microsoft’s Advanced Threat Protection for Office 365, phishing emails are still delivered. A 2017 study by SE Labs showed even with this additional anti-phishing control, Office 365 anti-phishing measures were only rated in the low-middle of the market for protection. With only the basic Exchange Online Protection, the protection was worse still.Whether you run an SMB or a large enterprise, you are likely to receive high volumes of spam and phishing emails and many messages will be delivered to end users’ inboxes. Since the emails can be virtually impossible for end users to identify as malicious, it is probable that all but the most experienced, well trained, security conscious workers will be fooled. What is therefore needed is an advanced third-party spam filtering solution that will work alongside Office 365 spam filtering controls to provide far greater protection.While Office 365 will block spam emails and phishing emails (Osterman Research showed it blocks 100% of known malware), it has been shown to lack performance against advanced phishing threats such as spear phishing.Office 365 does not have the same level of predictive technology as dedicated on-premises and cloud-based email security gateways which are much better at detecting zero-day attacks, new malware, and advanced spear phishing campaigns.To greatly improve protection what is needed is a dedicated third-party spam filtering solution for Office 365 such as SpamTitan. SpamTitan focuses on defense in depth, and provides superior protection against advanced phishing attacks, new malware, and sophisticated email attacks to ensure malicious messages are blocked or quarantined rather than being delivered to end users’ inboxes. Some of the additional protections provided by SpamTitan against Office 365 phishing attacks are detailed in the image below:To find out more about making Office 365 more secure and how SpamTitan can benefit your company, contact TitanHQ. Our highly experienced sales consultants will be able to advise you on the full range of benefits of SpamTitan, the best deployment option, and can offer you a free trial to allow you to personally evaluate the solution before committing to a purchase. by titanadmin | Sep 16, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software, Website Filtering | A new Python-based form of ransomware has been detected that masquerades as Locky, one of the most widely used ransomware variants in 2016. The new ransomware variant has been named PyLocky ransomware by security researchers at Trend Micro who have observed it being used in attacks in Europe, particularly France, throughout July and August.The spam email campaigns were initially sent in relatively small batches, although over time the volume of emails distributing PyLocky ransomware has increased significantly.Various social engineering tactics are being used by the attackers to get the ransomware installed, including fake invoices. The emails intercepted by Trend Micro have included an embedded hyperlink which directs users to a malicious webpage where a zip file is downloaded. The zip file contains PyLocky ransomware which has been compiled using the PyInstaller tool, which allows Python applications to be converted to standalone executable files.If installed, PyLocky ransomware will encrypt approximately 150 different file types including Office documents, image files, sound files, video files, databases, game files, archives, and program files. Files stored on all logical drives will be encrypted and the original copies will be overwritten. A ransom note is then dropped on the desktop which has been copied from the note used by the threat actors behind Locky, although the two cryptoransomware threats are unrelated. Ransom notes are written in French, English, Korean, and Italian so it is probable that the attacks will become more widespread over the coming weeks.While Python is not typically used to create ransomware, PyLocky is not the only Python-based ransomware variant to have been created. Pyl33t was used in several attacks in 2017, and CryPy emerged in 2016. What makes the latest ransomware variant stand out is its anti-machine learning capabilities, which help to prevent analysis using standard static analysis methods.The ransomware abuses Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) to determine the properties of the system on which it is installed. If the total visible memory of a system is 4GB or greater, the ransomware will execute immediately. If it is lower than 4GB, the ransomware will sleep for 11.5 days – an attempt to determine if it is in a sandbox environment.Preventing attacks requires a variety of cybersecurity measures. An advanced spam filtering solution such as SpamTitan will help to prevent the spam emails being delivered to end users’ inboxes. A web filter, such as WebTitan, can be employed to control the websites that can be accessed by end users and block malicious file downloads. Security awareness training will help to ensure that end users recognize the threat for what it is. Advanced malware detection tools are required to identify the threat due to its anti-machine learning capabilities.There is no free decryptor for PyLocky. Recovery without paying the ransom will depend on a viable backup copy existing, which has not also been encrypted in the attack. by titanadmin | Aug 31, 2018 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | A spam email campaign is being conducted targeting corporate email accounts to distribute Loki Bot malware. Loki Bot malware is an information stealer capable of obtaining passwords stored in browsers, obtaining email account passwords, FTP client logins, cryptocurrency wallet passwords, and passwords used for messaging apps.In addition to stealing saved passwords, Loki Bot malware has keylogging capabilities and is potentially capable of downloading and running executable files. All information captured by the malware is transferred to the attacker’s C2 server.Kaspersky Lab researchers identified an increase in email spam activity targeting corporate email accounts, with the campaign discovered to be used to spread Loki Bot malware. The malware was delivered hidden in a malicious email attachment.The intercepted emails included an ICO file attachment. ICO files are copies of optical discs, which are usually mounted in a virtual CD/DVD drive to open. While specialist software can be used to open these files, most modern operating systems have the ability to access the contents of the files without the need for any additional software.In this case, the ICO file contains Loki Bot malware and double clicking on the file will result in installation of the malware on operating systems that support the files (Vista and later).It is relatively rare for ICO files to be used to deliver malware, although not unheard of. The unfamiliarity with ICO files for malware delivery may see end users attempt to open the files.The campaign included a wide range of lures including fake purchase orders, speculative enquiries from companies containing product lists, fake invoices, bank transfer details, payment requests, credit notifications, and payment confirmations. Well-known companies such as Merrill Lynch, Bank of America, and DHL were spoofed in some of the emails.A separate and unrelated spam email campaign has been identified that is using IQY files to deliver a new form of malware known as Marap. Marap malware is a downloader capable of downloading a variety of different payloads and additional modules.Upon installation, the malware fingerprints the system and gathers information such as username, domain name, IP address, hostname, language, country, Windows version, details of Microsoft .ost files, and any anti-virus solutions detected on the infected computer. What happens next depends on the system on which it is installed. If the system is of particular interest, it is earmarked for a more extensive compromise.Four separate campaigns involving millions of messages were detected by researchers at Proofpoint. One campaign included an IQY file as an attachment, one included an IQY file within a zip file and a third used an embedded IQY file in a PDF file. The fourth used a Microsoft Word document containing a malicious macro. The campaigns appear to be targeting financial institutions.IQY files are used by Excel to download web content directly into spreadsheets. They have been used in several spam email campaigns in recent weeks to install a variety of different malware variants. The file type is proving popular with cybercriminals because many anti-spam solutions fail to recognize the files as malicious.Since the majority of end users would not have any need to open ICO or IQY files, these file types should be added to the list of blocked file types in email spam filters to prevent them from being delivered to end users’ inboxes. by titanadmin | Aug 27, 2018 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Hotels, restaurants, and telecommunications companies are being targeted with a new spam email campaign that delivers a new form of malware called AdvisorsBot. AdvisorsBot is a malware downloader which, like many malware variants, is being distributed vis spam emails containing Microsoft Word attachments with malicious macros.Opening an infected email attachment and enabling macros on the document will see Advisorsbot installed. Advisorsbot’s primary role is to perform fingerprinting on an infected device. Information will be gathered on the infected device is then communicated to the threat actors’ command and control servers and further instructions are provided to the malware based on the information gathered on the system. The malware records system information, details of programs installed on the device, Office account details, and other information. It is also able to take screenshots on an infected device.AdvisorsBot malware is so named because the early samples of the malware that were first identified in May 2018 contacted command and control servers that contained the word advisors.The spam email campaign is primarily being conducted on targets in the United States, although infections have been detected globally. Several thousands of devices have been infected with the malware since May, according to the security researchers at Proofpoint who discovered the new malware threat. The threat actors believed to be behind the attacks are a APT group known as TA555.Various email lures are being used in this malware campaign to get the recipients to open the infected attachment and enable macros. The emails sent to hotels appear to be from individuals who have been charged twice for their stay. The campaign on restaurants uses emails which claim that the sender has suffered food poisoning after eating in a particular establishment, while the attacks on telecommunications companies use email attachments that appear to be resumes from job applicants.AdvisorsBot is written in C, but a second form of the malware has also been detected that is written in .NET and PowerShell. The second variant has been given the name PoshAdvisor. PoshAdvisor is executed via a malicious macro which runs a PowerShell command that downloads a PowerShell script which executes shellcode that runs the malware in the memory without writing it to the disk.These malware threats are still under development and are typical of many recent malware threats which have a wide range of capabilities and the versatility to be used for many different types of attack such as information stealing, ransomware delivery, and cryptocurrency mining. The malicious actions performed are determined based on the system on which the malware has been installed. If that system is ideally suited for mining cryptocurrency, the relevant code will be installed. If the business is of particular interest, it will be earmarked for a more extensive compromise.The best form of defense against this campaign is the use of an advanced spam filtering solution to prevent the emails from being delivered and security awareness training for employees to condition them how to respond when such a threat arrives in their inbox. by titanadmin | Aug 15, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Network Security | Two factor authentication flaws have been identified that allow accounts to be accessed even when protected by a password and second authentication factor.Two-factor authentication is an important safeguard to secure accounts. In the event of login credentials being guessed or otherwise obtained by a third party, an additional method of authentication is required to gain access to the account. Without that second factor, access to the account is blocked. But not always. Multiple two-factor authentication flaws have been identified.Two-factor authentication is not infallible. Recently, Reddit disclosed that it had suffered a data breach even though two factor authentication had been implemented. Rather than use a token, Reddit used SMS messages to a mobile phone owned by the account holder as the second authentication factor. As Reddit discovered, SMS messages can be intercepted. The attacker was able to intercept a 2FA SMS message and gain access to an employee’s account, through which it was possible to access to an old database of user credentials.Two-factor authentication was also in place at Yahoo in 2013, yet the company still experienced a massive data breach that resulted in all three billion of its users having their information obtained by hackers. Go back a year and there was the massive 167 million record data breach at LinkedIn, which had also implemented two-factor authentication.A phone call or text message to a phone owned by the account holder does not necessarily prevent access to the account from being gained by a third party. In August last year, a Bitcoin investor had $150,000 of cryptocurrency stolen from his wallet after it was accessed by a third party. In that case, the investor’s second factor phone number had been re-routed to a device owned by the attacker after the phone company was duped.Any second factor that uses the phone system of SMS messages provides an additional layer of protection, but it is not enough to protect against a determined skilled hacker.A major two-factor authentication vulnerability was recently discovered by a security researcher at Okta. Okta, like many companies, uses Microsoft’s Active Directory Federation Services (ADFS) to provide multi-factor authentication.Okta security researcher Andrew Lee discovered the system have a serious vulnerability that was not only straightforward to exploit, doing so would render an organization’s multi-factor authentication controls virtually useless.Lee discovered that someone with a username, password, and a valid 2-factor token for one account could use the same token to gain access to any other account in the organization in AD with only a username and password. Any employee who is given an account and specified their own second factor could use it to access other accounts. Essentially the token was like a hotel room key card that opens all rooms in the hotel.Obtaining another employee’s login credentials would only require a phishing campaign to be conducted. If an individual responded and disclosed their credentials, their account could be accessed without the need for a second factor.The vulnerability in question, which was patched by Microsoft on August 14 in its August Patch Tuesday updates, was present in how ADFA communicates. When a user tries to login, an encrypted context log is sent by the server which contains the second factor token but not the username. This flaw could be exploited to fool the system into thinking the correct token had been supplied, as no check was made to determine whether the correct token had been supplied for a specific user’s account. As long as one valid username, password and 2FA token combo was owned, the 2FA system could be bypassed.These two factor authentication flaws show that while 2-factor authentication is an important control to implement, businesses should not rely on the system to prevent unauthorized accessing of accounts. The two-factor authentication flaws discussed here are unlikely to be the last to be uncovered.2-factor authentication should be just one element of an organization’s defenses against phishing and hacking, along with spam filters web filters, firewalls, intrusion detection systems, antivirus solutions, network segmentation, and employee security awareness training. 2FA should not be viewed as a silver bullet to prevent unauthorized account access. by titanadmin | Aug 9, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A new sextortion phishing threat has been detected that is proving to have the desired effect. Many recipients of the emails have paid up to avoid being exposed.On the face of it, this sextortion phishing scam is as simple as it gets. A threat actor claims to have taken control of the target’s computer and recorded them via their webcam while they were visiting an adult website. A threat is made to publicly release the video of them viewing pornography unless a payment is made.For some recipients of such an email, such a threat would be enough to get them opening their Bitcoin wallet and making the payment without a second’s hesitation. Most people would likely see the email for what it really is. A scam and an empty threat.However, a second variant of the email is being used that is a lot more personalized and includes a snippet of information to add credibility to the scam. The message includes the user’s password as ‘confirmation’ that it is not an empty threat. The attacker also claims, through compromising the target’s computer, to have obtained all the victim’s contacts including contacts in their social media accounts.While the threat actor claims to have control of the user’s computer, that is not the case. The password has been obtained from a previous data breach and a list has likely been purchased on the darknet.For many of the email recipients, the password will be old and will have been changed long ago. That may be enough in some cases to see payment made. However, for those who are still using that password, the threat may seem very real.This is in reality a very simple scam that in many cases only works because despite the risk of failing to change passwords frequently, recycling old passwords, and reusing passwords on multiple sites, the practice is still commonplace.It is not known how many emails have been sent by the scammers – most likely millions – but it only takes a handful of people to respond and make payment for the scheme to be profitable.So far, at least 151 people have responded to the sextortion phishing scam and made a payment to one of 313 Bitcoin addresses known to be used by the scammers. So far, at least 30.08 BTC had been raised – Approximately $250,000 – from the scam as of July 26 and it has only been running for a few weeks. The researcher tracking the payments (SecGuru) pointed out that the attackers have made three times as much as the individuals behind the WannaCry ransomware attacks last year.Even without the password, the sextortion phishing scam has proved effective. Payments have been made in both versions of the scam. The standard scam asks for a payment of a few hundred dollars, although the inclusion of a password sees the payment rise considerably. Some individuals have been told it will cost them $8,000 to prevent the release of the video. Some individuals have paid thousands to the scammers.Given the widespread coverage of the scam, and its success rate, it is probable that many more similar schemes will be conducted. Variations along the same theme could direct recipients to a phishing website where they are enticed into disclosing their current password, to an exploit kit that downloads malware, or to another scam site.Protecting against a scam such as this is easiest by using strong passwords, regularly changing them, and never reusing passwords on multiple sites. It is also worthwhile periodically checking to find out if their credentials have been exposed in a data breach on HaveIBeenPwned.com and immediately changing passwords if they have.Anyone receiving a sextortion phishing email such as this should be aware that this is a scam. If the password included is currently being used, it is essential to change it immediately across all sites. And of course, set a strong, unique password for each account. by titanadmin | Aug 3, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | The past year has seen a steady increase in the number of reported email account compromises, with the healthcare industry one of the main targets for hackers.Some of those breaches have seen the protected health information of thousands of patients compromised, with the largest phishing attack in 2018 – The phishing attack on Boys Town National Research Hospital – seeing more than 105,000 patients’ healthcare information exposed. Due to reporting requirements under HIPAA, healthcare phishing attacks are highly visible, although email account compromises are occurring across all industry sectors and the problem is getting worse.The increase in successful phishing attacks has been tracked by Beazley, a provider of specialist insurance services. The company’s research shows the number of reported phishing attacks increased every quarter since Q1, 2017 when there were 45 reported breaches that involved email accounts being compromised. In Q2, 2018, there were 184 email account compromises reported. Between Q1, 2017 and Q1, 2018, the number of reported data breaches involving compromised email accounts increased by 284%.Why are email account compromises increasing? What do hackers gain from accessing email accounts rather than say, gaining access to networks which store vast amounts of data?It can take a significant amount of time and effort to identify a vulnerability such a missed patch, an exposed S3 bucket, or an unsecured medical device, and exploit it.By comparison, gaining access to an email account is relatively easy. Once access is gained, accessing further email accounts becomes easier still. If a hacker can gain access to an email account with the right level of administrative privileges, it may be possible for the entire mail system of an organization to be accessed.If a hacker can gain access to a single email account, the messages in the account can be studied to gain valuable information about a company, its employees, and vendors. The hackers can identify further targets within an organization for spear phishing campaigns – termed Business Email Compromise (BEC) attacks – and attacks on contractors and suppliers.If an executive’s email account is compromised, it can be used to send requests for wire transfers to the accounts department, HR can be emailed requesting W2-Forms that contain all the information necessary for filing fake tax returns and for identity theft. Requests can be sent via email to redirect employees’ paychecks and phishing emails can be sent to other employees directing them to websites where they have to divulge their email credentials.Figures from the FBI show just how lucrative these Business Email Compromise (BEC) phishing attacks can be. Since October 2013, more than $12.5 billion has been lost to BEC attacks, up from $5.3 billion in December 2016.Once access to the email system is gained, it is much easier to craft highly convincing spear phishing emails. Past email conversations can be studied, and an individual’s style of writing emails can be copied to avoid raising any red flags.Beazley also notes that email account compromises are some of the costliest breaches to resolve, requiring many hours of painstaking work to manually checking each email in a compromised account for PII and PHI. One example provided involved a programmatic search of compromised email accounts to identify PHI, yet that search uncovered 350,000 documents that required a manual check. The cost of checking those documents alone was $800,000.Beazley also notes that when investigating breaches, the breached entity often discovers that only half of the compromised email accounts have been identified. The data breaches are usually much more extensive than was initially thought.Unfortunately, once access to a single email account is gained, it is much harder to prevent further email compromises as technological controls are not so effective at identifying emails sent from within a company. However, it is relatively easy to block the initial phishing attempt.Many companies fail to implement basic controls to block phishing attacks. Even when a phishing-related breach is experienced, companies often remain susceptible to further breaches. The Ponemon Institute/IBM Security Cost of a Data Breach study showed there is a 27.9% probability of a company experiencing a further breach in the 24 months following a data breach.To prevent phishing attacks, companies need to: by titanadmin | Jul 31, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | In recent weeks, several large healthcare data breaches have been reported that have seen cybercriminals gain access to employees’ email accounts and sensitive data, although the recently disclosed UnityPoint Health phishing attack stands out due to the huge number of individuals that have been impacted and the extent of sensitive data exposed.UnityPoint Health is one of the largest healthcare systems serving Iowa residents. The Des Moines-based healthcare provider recently discovered that its employees have been targeted in a phishing campaign that has seen several email accounts compromised. Those email accounts contained the sensitive information of approximately 1.4 million patients.That not only makes this the largest phishing incident to have been suffered by a U.S. healthcare provider in 2018, it is also the largest healthcare data breach of 2018 and one of the most serious phishing attacks and data breaches ever reported.The UnityPoint Health phishing attack has seen highly sensitive data compromised, including names, addresses, health insurance information, medical record numbers, diagnoses, treatment information, lab test results, medications, providers, dates of service, Social Security numbers, driver’s license numbers and, for a limited number of patients, their payment card information.The phishing emails were sent to employees between March 14 and April 3, 2018, although the breach was not detected until May 31. As is common in phishing attacks on businesses, access to email accounts was gained through the impersonation of a senior executive.A series of spoofed emails were sent to employees that appeared to have come from a trusted executive’s email account. Employees who opened the email were instructed to click a link that required them to enter their email login information. That information was captured by the attackers who were then able to gain access to the employees’ email accounts.The UnityPoint Health phishing attack potentially gave the hackers access to all the information stored in the compromised email accounts – Information that could be used for identity theft and fraud. It is unclear whether mailboxes were downloaded, although UnityPoint Health said its forensic investigation suggests that the primary goal was to divert payroll payments and to use account access to fool accounts department staff into making fraudulent wire transfers. It is unclear if any of those attempts succeeded.This is also not the only UnityPoint Health phishing attack to be reported this year. In March, UnityPoint Health announced that 16,400 patients had been affected by a separate phishing attack that saw multiple email accounts compromised.The latest incident has prompted the healthcare provider to implement new technology to detect phishing and BEC attacks, multi-factor authentication has been implemented, and additional security awareness training has been provided to employees. Credit monitoring and identify theft monitoring services have been offered to patients whose driver’s license or Social Security number has been exposed, and all patients have been notified by mail.As the Ponemon Institute’s 2018 Cost of a Data Breach Study showed, the cost of these million-record+ data breaches is considerable. The average cost of such a breach was estimated to be around $40 million. by titanadmin | Jul 26, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Software, Website Filtering | One of the world’s biggest shipping firms – Cosco – has experienced a ransomware attack that has seen its local email system and network telephone in the Americas taken out of action as the result of widespread file encryption.The Cosco ransomware attack is believed to have been contained in the Americas region. As a precaution and to prevent further spread to other systems, connections to all other regions have been disabled pending a full investigation. A warning has also been issued to all other regions warning of the threat of attack by email, with the firm telling its staff not to open any suspicious email communications. IT staff in other regions have also been advised to conduct scans of their network with antivirus software as a precaution.The attack started on Tuesday, July 24, and its IT infrastructure remains down; however, the firm has confirmed that that attack has not affected any of its vessels which continue to operate as normal. Its main business systems are still operational, although the operators of terminals at some U.S ports are experiencing delays processing documentation and delivery orders.It would appear that the Cosco ransomware attack is nowhere near the scale of the attack on the world’s biggest shipping firm A.P. Møller-Maersk, which like many other firms, fell victim to the NotPetya attacks last year. In that case, while the malware appeared to be ransomware, it was actually a wiper with no chance of file recovery.The attack, which affected more than 45,000 endpoints and 4,000 servers, is estimated to have cost the shipping company between $250 million and $350 million to resolve. All servers and endpoints needed to be rebuilt, and the firm was crippled for 10 days. In that case, the attack was possible due to an unpatched vulnerability.Another major ransomware attack was reported last week in the United States. LabCorp, one of the leading networks of clinical testing laboratories in the United States, experienced a ransomware attack involving a suspected variant of SamSam ransomware.  While the variant of ransomware has not been confirmed, LabCorp did confirm the ransomware was installed as a result of a brute force attack on Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP).Labcorp was both quick to detect the attack and contain it, responding within 50 minutes, although 7,000 systems and 1,900 servers are understood to have been affected. It has taken several days for the systems to be brought back online, during which time customers have been experiencing delays obtaining their lab test results.Several cybersecurity firms have reported that ransomware attacks are in decline, with cryptocurrency mining offering better rewards, although the threat from ransomware is still ever present and attacks are occurring through a variety of attack vectors – exploitation of vulnerabilities, brute force attacks, exploit kit downloads, and, commonly, through spam and phishing emails.To protect against ransomware attacks, companies must ensure security best practices are followed. Patches must be applied promptly on all networks, endpoints, applications, and databases, spam filtering software should be used to prevent malicious messages from reaching inboxes, web filters used to prevent downloads of ransomware from malicious websites, and all staff should receive ongoing cybersecurity awareness training.Additionally, systems should be implemented to detect anomalies such as excessing file renaming, and networks should be segmented to prevent lateral movement in the event that ransomware is deployed.Naturally, it is also essential that data are backed up regularly to ensure recovery is possible without having to resort to paying the ransom demand. As the NotPetya attacks showed, paying a ransom to recover files may not be an option. by titanadmin | Jul 25, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam | The National Bank of Blacksburg in Virginia has discovered just how important it is to have effective controls in place to protect against phishing. The bank suffered two costly phishing attacks in the space of eight months that have resulted in losses exceeding $2.4 million.Phishing is the leading tactic used by cybercriminals to gain access to login credentials, steal data, and install malware. Emails are sent to employees with malicious attachments, which if opened, result in the installation of malware. Alternatively, links are sent in emails that direct employees to fraudulent websites where they are fooled into disclosing their login credentials.The first attack on Blacksburg Bank took place on May 28, 2016. Malware was installed on its systems which gave the attackers access to the STAR Network – The system that manages debit card ATM activity. After gaining access to the STAR Network, the hackers were able to change account balances, remove security measures such as anti-theft and anti-fraud protections, conduct keystroke logging, and authorize withdrawals from customers’ accounts via ATMs.In the two days that the hackers had access to the system, they were able to make withdrawals at hundreds of ATMs across the country and stole $569,648.24 from customers’ accounts. This was possible without stealing customers cards or using skimmers to create fake bank cards.The malware was detected on May 30, 2016 and the attack was investigated by the computer forensics firm Foregenix which determined that the malware was installed as a result of an employee being duped by a phishing email.Eight months later, on January 7, 2017, a similar attack occurred which involved cybercriminals gaining access to the STAR Network. Similarly, access was possible for two days, although in this case approximately $1.8 million was withdrawn from customers’ accounts. Verizon investigated the breach and concluded that access was gained as a result of an employee falling for a phishing scam.The National Bank of Blacksburg holds an insurance policy against cyberattacks although its insurer, Everest National Insurance Company, has refused to cover the losses. Blacksburg is now suing its insurer for breach of contract.What these incidents show is just how easy it is for major losses to be suffered as a result of employees falling for phishing scams and the importance of having robust anti-phishing measures in place.There is no single solution that will provide total protection against phishing, although a good place to start is with an advanced spam filtering solution such as SpamTitan.SpamTitan uses dual antivirus engines (Bitdefender and ClamAV) that provides superior protection against phishing and block emails containing malware and malware downloaders. The solution performs multiple checks on each incoming email to determine whether it is genuine, spam, or malicious, including standard checks of email headers, a Bayesian analysis on message content, and greylisting. Together, these controls ensure 99.97% of spam emails are detected and blocked, with a false positive rate of just 0.03%. Independent tests at Virus Bulletin have confirmed a 100% malware detection rate.No anti-spam solution will block 100% of all spam and phishing emails so it is essential for employees to be trained how to recognize phishing emails. While it was once a best practice to provide annual training, with the volume of phishing emails now being sent and the increased sophistication of attacks, an annual training session is no longer sufficient.Training needs to be ongoing, with regular training sessions scheduled throughout the year and employees conditioned through phishing simulation exercises. With effective spam filtering and employee security awareness training, the majority of phishing attempts can be thwarted. by titanadmin | Jul 19, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam | In 2017, data breach mitigation costs fell year-on year; however, that appears to be a blip. The 2018 Cost of a Data Breach Study conducted by the Ponemon Institute (on behalf of IBM Security) has revealed data breach mitigation costs have risen once again.The Ponemon Institute conducts the Cost of a Data Breach Study every year. For the 2018 study, the Ponemon Institute conducted interviews with 2,200 IT, data security, and compliance professionals from 477 companies in 15 countries, including the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Canada, Brazil, Japan and Australia. The companies represented in the study came from a wide range of industry sectors. Each of those companies had experienced a data breach in the past 12 months.Naturally, the larger the breach, the higher the cost of mitigation is likely to be. Breaches involving millions of records would naturally cost more to resolve than breaches of 50,000 records. Catastrophic data breaches – those involving millions of records – are not normally included in the study. This year was the first time that mega data breaches – those involving more than 1,000,000 records – were included, although they were treated separately.The analysis of the main part of the study involved breaches ranging from 2,500 records to a little over 100,000 records. The average breach size was 24,615 records globally, 31,465 records in the United States, 22,800 records in the UK, and 19,200 records in Japan.The costs associated with those data breaches was analyzed using the activity-based costing (ABC) methodology. The ABC methodology identified four process-related activities and assigned costs based on actual use. Those activities were Detection and Escalation, Post Data Breach Response, Breach Notifications, and Lost Business Cost. The analysis identified the average total cost of a data breach taking all four activity areas into account.The study also revealed measures taken prior to the breach, during, and after, that can limit losses or increase data breach mitigation costs.A data breach now costs an average of $3.86 million to revolve. Last year, the average cost of a data breach was $3.62 million. Data breach costs have therefore increased by 6.4% in the space of a year.On average, per capita data breach mitigation costs rose by 4.8%, with a data breach costing, on average, $148 per record. Last year, the global average was $141 per record.In addition to the rising cost, the severity of the breaches also increased, with the data breaches in this year’s sample impacting 2.2% more individuals on average.Data breaches cost more to resolve in the United States than any other country. The average data breach mitigation costs in the United States is $7.91 million per breach. The lowest costs were in India, where the average breach cost was $1.77 million. The highest per capita costs were also in the United States at £233 per record.Hackers and malicious insiders caused the most breaches and they were also the costliest to resolve at $157 per record. System glitches cost an average of £131 per record and breaches caused by human error cost the least at $128 per record.Data breach costs varied considerably by industry sector, with healthcare data breach mitigation costs the highest by some distance at an average of $408 per record, followed by financial services breaches at $206 per record, services at $181 per record, and pharmaceutical industry breaches at $174 per record. Breaches in the education sector cost an average of $166 per record, retail industry breaches were $116 per record, and the lowest data breach mitigation costs were in the public sector at $75 per record.The study of mega data breaches revealed a breach of 1 million records costs an estimated $39.49 million to resolve, while a breach of 50 million records costs an estimated $350 million. Since there were only 11 breaches of more than 1 million records in the sample it was not possible to accurately calculate the average cost of these breaches.For the study, 22 different factors were assessed to determine how they affected data breach mitigation costs. The most important cost saving measures that can be taken to reduce the cost of a data breach are having an incident response team ($14 less per record), widespread use of encryption ($13.1 less per record), BCM involvement ($9.3 less per record), employee training ($9.3 less per record), participation in threat sharing ($8.7 less per record) and use of an artificial intelligence platform ($8.2 less per record).The main factors that increased data breach mitigation costs were third party involvement ($13.4 more per record), extensive cloud migration at the time of the breach ($11.9 more per record), compliance failures ($11.9 more per record), extensive use of mobile platforms ($10.0 more per record), lost or stolen devices ($6.5 more per record), and extensive use of IoT devices ($5.4 more per record).With the cost of data breaches rising, more cyberattacks being conducted, and the likelihood of a breach being experienced now higher, it is essential not only for companies to implement layered security defenses, but also to make sure they are prepared for the worst.Companies need to assume a breach will be experienced and policies and procedures need to be developed to deal with the breach when it happens. An incident response team should be prepared to spring into action to ensure everyone known what needs to be done when disaster strikes. The sooner a breach is identified and mitigated, the lower the breach mitigation costs will be. by titanadmin | Jul 12, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Website Filtering | There has been a major increase in cryptojacking attacks in recent months. Many cybercriminal gangs now favoring this method of attack over ransomware and other forms of malware and are taking advantage of the high value of cryptocurrencies.As with ransomware attacks, cybercriminals need to install malicious code on computers. Instead of encrypting files like ransomware, the code is used to mine for cryptocurrency. Mining cryptocurrencies involves a computers CPU being used to solve complex computational problems, which are necessary for verifying cryptocurrency transactions and adding to the blockchain. In exchange for verifying transactions, the miner is paid a small amount for the effort.Devoting one computer to the task of cryptocurrency mining could generate a few dollars a day. Using multiple computers for the task can generate a substantial return. The more computers that are used, the more blocks can be added to the blockchain and the greater the profits. When a network of cryptocurrency mining slave computers can be amassed, the profits can be considerable. According to Kaspersky Lab, one cryptojacking gang that focusses on infecting enterprise servers and spreading the malicious code using NSA exploits, has generated around 9,000 Monero, which equates to $2 million.Not all computers are suitable for mining cryptocurrency. One cybercriminal gang has got around this by developing malware that can decide whether to deploy a cryptocurrency miner or ransomware, with the decision based on the processing power of the computer. If its not suitable for use mining cryptocurrency, ransomware is deployed. This tactic helps maximize profits after compromising a device.The use of cryptocurrency miners increased sharply last year as the value of cryptocurrencies started to soar. The price of those cryptocurrencies may have fallen, but cryptojacking attacks are still on the rise. The volume of new cryptojacking malware variants has also increased considerably over the past few months.  Figures from McAfee indicate the number of cryptojacking malware variants increased by a staggering 1,189% in the first three months of 2018 alone, rising from around 400,000 malware variants to more than 2.9 million.Over the same time frame, there has been a fall in the number of ransomware attacks. In Q1, ransomware attacks fell by around 32%, indicating threat actors who previously used ransomware to make money have changed their tactics and are now using cryptocurrency miners.Ransomware attacks falling by a third is certainly good news, although the threat from ransomware cannot be ignored. Steps must be taken to prevent the installation of the file encrypting code and good backup practices are essential to ensure files can be recovered in the event of an attack. Certain industries face a higher risk of ransomware attacks than others, such as the healthcare industry, where attacks are still rife.Cryptojacking attacks are more widespread, although the education sector has proven to be a major target. Many mining operations have been discovered in the education sector, although it is unclear whether these mining operations are legitimate, computers are being used by students to mine cryptocurrency, or if educational institutions are being targeted.One thing is clear. As the value of cryptocurrencies rose, the number of mining attacks increased. That suggests that should prices fall, cybercriminals will switch to other types of attacks, and there could be a resurgence in ransomware attacks.It could be argued that the installation of cryptocurrency mining malware on a computer is far less of a problem than ransomware or other forms of malware. When the CPU is mining cryptocurrency, the user is likely to find their computer somewhat sluggish. This can result in a drop in productivity. Heavy processing can also cause computers to overheat and hardware damage can result.Cryptojacking malware is usually installed by a downloader, which can remain on a computer. If the profits from mining cryptocurrency fall, new malware variants could easily be downloaded in its place. Cryptocurrency mining malware can also be bundled with other malware variants that steal sensitive information. Cryptojacking attacks are therefore a major threat.Protecting against cryptojacking attacks involves the same security controls that are used to block other forms of malware. Cryptojacking malware can be installed by exploiting vulnerabilities so good patch management is essential. Spam and phishing emails are used to install malware downloaders, so an advanced spam filtering solution is a must. Web filters can prevent web-based mining attacks and malware downloads and offer an important extra layer of protection. It is also important not to neglect end users. Security awareness training can help to eradicate risky behaviors.Additionally, security audits should be conducted, first to scan for the presence of cryptojacking malware, which includes searching for anomalies that could indicate the presence of the malware. Those audits should include servers, end points, POS systems, and all other systems. Any system connected to the network could potentially be used for mining cryptocurrency. by titanadmin | Jul 6, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | Rakhni ransomware, a malware variant first detected in 2013, has spawned many variants over the past three years and is still an active threat. Rakhni ransomware locks files on an infected device to prevent the user from accessing their data. A ransom demand is issued and if payment is made, the attackers will supply the keys to unlock the encryption. If the ransom is not paid the files will remain encrypted. In such cases, the only option for file recovery is to restore files from backups.Now the developers of Rakhni ransomware have incorporated new functionality. Checks are performed on an infected device to determine whether it has sufficient processing power to be used as a cryptocurrency mining slave. If so, cryptocurrency mining malware will be downloaded. If not, ransomware will be deployed.This new development should not come as a major surprise. The massive rise in the value of many cryptocurrencies has made mining cryptocurrencies far more profitable for cybercriminals than ransomware. When ransomware is installed, many victims choose not to pay and instead recover files from backups. Infection is no guarantee that a payment will be received. If a cryptocurrency miner can be installed, it gets straight to work generating money for the attackers. Ransomware attacks are still a major threat, although many cybercriminals have switched their operations to mining cryptocurrencies. In fact, cryptocurrency mining malware attacks are now much more common than ransomware attacks.However, not all computers have sufficient CPU processing power to make cryptocurrency mining worthwhile, so the method used by the threat actors behind Rakhni ransomware helps them maximize their profits.The new Rakhni ransomware campaign was detected by researchers at Kaspersky Lab. The malware used is Delphi-based and is being distributed in phishing emails containing a Microsoft Word file attachment.The user is advised to save the document and enable editing. The document contains a PDF file icon which, if clicked, launches a fake error message suggesting the DLL file required to open the PDF file has not been found. The user needs to click on the OK box to close the error message.When the error box is closed, the malware performs a series of checks on the machine to identify the processes running on the device and assesses those processes to determine if it is running in a sandbox environment and the likelihood of it being able to run undetected. After these checks have been performed the system is assessed to determine its capabilities.If the machine has more than two processors and does not have a Bitcoin folder in the AppData folder, a cryptocurrency miner will be installed. The cryptocurrency miner uses fake root certificates which show the program has been issued by Microsoft Corporation to help disguise the miner as a trusted application.If a Bitcoin folder does exist, certain processes will be stopped, and Rakhni ransomware will be downloaded and run. If there is no Bitcoin folder and only one processor, the malware will use its worm component and twill attempt to spread to other devices on the network where the process starts over.Advanced anti-virus software can provide protection against this attack, while spam filtering solutions can prevent the phishing emails from being delivered to end users. Businesses should also ensure that their employees are made aware of the risk of these types of attacks through security awareness training. Employees should be instructed never to open attachments in emails from unknown senders and taught the warning signs of a potential attack in progress. Naturally, good data backup practices are essential to ensure that if all other controls fail, files can be recovered without paying a ransom. by titanadmin | Jul 5, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | A major Children’s Mercy Hospital phishing attack has highlighted the importance of implementing effective spam filtering controls and the need to provide security awareness training to end users.Phishing is a method of fraudulently obtaining sensitive information through deception. While attacks can occur over the telephone, via social media sites, or through text messages and chat platforms, the most common attack vector is email.Convincing emails are sent to end users urging them to open an email attachment or to click on a malicious link. Attachments are used to install malware, either directly through malware attached to the email, or more commonly, using macros or other malicious code in documents which download scripts that in turn download the malicious payload.In the case of embedded hyperlinks in emails, they typically direct an end user to a website that asks them to login. The website could ask for their email credentials, appear to be a Google login box, Dropbox login page, or other file sharing platform. Disclosing login credentials on that webpage sends the information to the attackers. These login pages are convincing. They look exactly like the sites that they are spoofing.That was the case with the Children’s Mercy Hospital phishing attack. The Kansas City, MO, hospital received several phishing emails which directed employees to fake login pages on criminally-controlled websites.The phishing attack occurred on or shortly before December 2, 2017. On Dec 2, Children’s Mercy’s security team identified authorized access to two employees’ email accounts. Access to the accounts was blocked the same day and the passwords were reset. Two weeks later, on December 15 and Dec 16, two further email accounts were accessed by unauthorized individuals. Again, unauthorized access was detected and blocked the same day. A fifth email account was accessed on January 3, 2018 with access blocked the following day.The prompt action in response to the Children’s Mercy phishing attack limited the potential for those email accounts to be abused. When criminals gain access to email accounts they often use them to send further phishing emails. Since those emails come from a legitimate email account, the recipients of the messages sent from that account are more likely to open the emails as they come from a trusted source. That is why business email compromise scams are so effective – because employees trust the sender of the email and take action as requested in the belief that they are genuine communications.In the case of the Children’s Mercy phishing attack, the criminals acted quickly. Following a forensic investigation into the attacks, Children’s Mercy discovered on January 19, 2018, that even though access to the accounts was promptly blocked, the attackers had successfully downloaded the mailboxes of four of the five employees. The messages contained a wide range of protected health information (PHI) of 63,049 patients.The PHI included information such as name, gender, age, height, weight, BMI score, procedure dates, admission dates, discharge dates, diagnosis and procedure codes, diagnoses, health conditions, treatment information, contact details, and demographic information.While Social Security numbers, insurance information, and financial data were not obtained – information most typically required to commit fraud – such detailed information on patients could be used in impersonation attacks on the patients. It would be quite easy for the attackers to pretend they were from the hospital and convince patients to provide their insurance information for example, which could then be used for medical identity fraud.Due to the scale of the attack and number of emails in the compromised accounts, it has taken a considerable time to identify the individuals affected. The Kansas City Star reports that some patients are only just being notified.In response, the hospital implemented 2-factor authentication and other technical controls to prevent further attacks.2-factor authentication is an important security measure that provides protection after a phishing attack has occurred. If login credentials are supplied, but the location or the device used to access the account is unfamiliar, an additional method of authentication is required before access to the account is granted – a code sent to a mobile phone for example.Two of the most effective security controls to prevent credential theft via phishing are spam filters and security awareness training.An advanced spam filter is an essential security measure to block phishing attacks. The changing tactics of cybercriminals means no spam filtering solution will be able to block every single phishing email, although SpamTitan, a highly effective spam filtering solution with advanced anti-phishing protections, blocks more than 99.97% of spam and malicious emails to ensure they do not arrive in end users’ inboxes.Security awareness training helps to prevent employees from clicking on the small percentage of messages that get past perimeter defenses. Employees need to be trained to give them the skills to identify phishing attempts and report them to their security teams. An ongoing training program, with phishing simulation exercises, will help to condition employees to recognize threats and respond appropriately. Over time, phishing email detection skills will improve considerably.An effective training program can limit the number of employees that respond to phishing attacks, either preventing the attackers from gaining access to email accounts or severely limiting the number of employees who respond and disclose their credentials.The Children’s Mercy phishing attack is one of many such attacks on healthcare organizations and businesses, and as those attacks increase and more data is obtained by criminals, implementing advanced phishing protections has never been more important.For further information on email security controls that can prevent phishing attacks, contact the TitanHQ team today and enquire about SpamTitan. by titanadmin | Jun 26, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | The FBI has published its 2017 Internet Crime Report, which details the main types of online crime reported to its Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3).In 2017, businesses and consumers reported 301,580 incidents to IC3 and more than $1.4 billion was lost to cybercriminals. Of course, these are only reported losses. Many Internet crimes go unreported, so the true losses are likely to be substantially higher.2017 saw more complaints of Internet crime than any other year since 2013 when the reports first started to be published.Identity theft and corporate data breaches often make the headlines, although by far the biggest area of criminal activity are business email compromise (BEC) scams – or email account compromise (EAC) when the scams target individuals.More than three times as much money was lost to BEC and EAC scams than the next highest cause of losses: confidence fraud/romance scams. In 2017, the reported losses from BEC/EAC scams was $676,151,185.Business email compromise and email account compromise scams involve the use of a compromised email account to convince individuals to make transfers of funds to accounts controlled by criminals or to send sensitive data via email.BEC scams usually start with compromising the email account of the CEO, CFO or another board member – which is why this type of scam is also known as CEO fraud. Access to the executive’s email account is gained via brute force guessing of passwords or, most commonly, social engineering techniques and phishing scams.Once access to the email account is gained, an email conversation is initiated with another member of the workforce, typically an individual responsible for making wire transfers. That individual is instructed to make a transfer to a new bank account – that of the attacker. Alternatively, the data of employees is requested – W2 Forms – or other sensitive company information.  These scams often involve large transfers of funds. In 2017 there were 15,690 such scams reported to IC3, making the average loss $43,094.Phishing, vishing, smishing and pharming were grouped together. They ‘only’ resulted in losses of $29,703,421, although the losses from these crimes are difficult to calculate accurately. The losses associated with phishing are grouped in many other categories. BEC scams often start with a phishing attack and research from Cofense suggests 91% of corporate data breaches start with a phishing email.The 2017 Internet Crime Report reveals the extent to which phishing is used in cyberattacks. There were 25,344 phishing incidents reported to IC3 in 2017 – the third highest category of Internet crime behind non-payment/non-delivery and personal data breaches. Many personal data breaches start with a phishing email.In addition to the threat of BEC attacks, the FBI’s 2017 Internet Crime Report warns of the threat from ransomware. Ransomware only resulted in reported losses of $2.3 million and attracted 1,783 complaints, although it is worthy of a mention due to the considerable disruption that attacks can cause. The reported losses – in terms of the ransoms paid – may be low, but actual losses are substantially higher. The ransomware attack on the City of Atlanta in April 2018 saw a ransom demand of $52,000 issued, although the actual cost of mitigating the attack was reported to be at least $2.7 million in April. However, in June 2018, city Information Management head Daphney Rackley indicated a further $9.5 million may be required over the coming year to cover the cost of mitigating the attack.Another hot topic detailed in the 2017 Internet Crime Report is tech support fraud – This is a widespread scam where individuals are fooled into thinking they have a computer problem such as a virus or malware installed, when they do not. Calls are made warning of detected malware, and users are directed to malicious websites via phishing emails where pop-up warnings are displayed, or screen lockers are used.These scams usually require the victim to pay the scammer to remove a fictitious infection and provide them with remote access to a computer. In addition to the scammers charge for removing the infection, sensitive data such as usernames, passwords, Social Security numbers, and bank account information are often stolen. 2017 saw a 90% increase in losses from tech support scams.One of the most important defenses for businesses to implement to protect against the leading cause of financial losses is an advanced spam filtering solution. Business email compromise scams often start with a phishing email and effective spam filtering will reduce the potential for email accounts to be compromised. Ransomware and malware are also primarily distributed via email. An advanced spam filter such as SpamTitan will block 100% of all known malware and prevent malicious messages from being delivered to inboxes.Security awareness training is also essential. Malicious messages will make it past spam filtering solutions on occasion, so it is important for all end users to be prepared for malicious messages and taught security best practices. Training should be provided to every individual in the company with a corporate email account or access to an Internet facing computer, including board members.A web filtering solution is also an important consideration. A web filter is an additional anti-malware control that can be used to prevent employees from visiting malicious websites – either via links in emails, redirects, or through general web browsing. A web filter, such as WebTitan, will block ransomware and malware downloads and prevent end users from accessing the types of phishing websites used to initiate BEC attacks.These three cybersecurity measures should be part of all organizations’ cybersecurity defenses. They will help to prevent businesses from being included in next year’s FBI Internet Crime Report. by titanadmin | Jun 25, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | UK users are being targeted with a fake WannaCry ransomware alert threatening file encryption if a ransom demand is not paid.In May last year, WannaCry ransomware attacks brought many companies to a standstill, with the UK’s National Health Service (NHS) a notable victim. Now, a little more than a year later, a new WannaCry ransomware campaign is being run, or so the sender of a batch of phishing emails claims.Email recipients are told “WannaCry is back!” and are warned that their devices have been hacked and ransomware has been installed.Email recipients are warned that the threat actors have perfected their ransomware and this time around antivirus software and firewalls will not prevent file encryption. Further, recovery will not be possible if the ransom is not paid.Failure to pay, or any attempt to try to remove the ransomware without paying the ransom demand will result in permanent file deletion. Further, the ransomware can propagate and infect the local network, cloud data, and remote devices, regardless of operating system.Email recipients are told that the ransomware has already been deployed and payment of a ransom of 0.1 Bitcoin – Around $650 – must be made to stop the attack. Email recipients are given just 24 hours to pay the ransom before data are permanently deleted.The email is signed by WannaCry-Hack-Team, and so far, more than 300 copies of the message have been reported to the UK government’s National Fraud and Cyber Crime Reporting Centre, Action Fraud.There are some signs that the email is not a genuine threat, and instead is just preying on fears about another WannaCry style attack.Ransomware attackers encrypt data then ask for a ransom to unlock files. They do not send a warning saying they will encrypt data if a ransom is not paid. That tactic may be used by some DDoS attackers, but not by ransomware threat actors.Email recipients are told that this version of WannaCry will work on “any version of Windows, iOS, Android, and Linux.” The original version of WannaCry took advantage of a vulnerability in Windows Server Message Block. WannaCry only affected vulnerable Windows devices that had not been patched. The ransomware was not a threat on other operating systems.Phishing campaigns often include spelling mistakes in the subject line and message body and this email is no different. The subject line is – “Attantion WannaCry”.This is simply a phishing campaign that attempts to extort money from the recipient. No ransomware has been installed and the attackers cannot encrypt any files.If you receive such a message threatening file encryption unless you pay a ransom, report the message to Action Fraud (UK), US-CERT (phishing-report@us-cert.gov) in the United States, or the government Fraud and Cyber Crime agency in your country of residence and delete the email and do not pay any Bitcoin ransom.Of course, not all ransomware threats are as benign as this and many attackers will be able to encrypt your data. To protect against real ransomware threats ensure you create multiple backups of your files, deploy a spam filtering solution, ensure your operating system and all software are kept up to date, and keep your anti-virus protection up to date. by titanadmin | Jun 18, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A new Adidas phishing scam has been detected that offers free shoes and money. The messages claim that Adidas is celebrating its 69th anniversary and is giving 2,500 lucky customers a free pair of Adidas sneakers and a free $50 a month subscription.The scam is targeting users on mobile devices in specific locations. If the user clicks the link in the message and is determined not to be using a mobile device, they will be directed to a webpage that displays a 404 error. The scam will also only run if the user is in the United States, Pakistan, India, Norway, Sweden, Nigeria, Kenya, Macau, Belgium or the Netherlands.Provided the user is on a mobile device and located in one of the targeted countries, a series of four questions will be asked. The responses to the questions are irrelevant as all users will be offered a “free” pair of sneakers after answering the four questions.In order to be able to claim the prize, users must share the offer with their contacts on WhatsApp. Regardless of whether the user does this, they will be directed to another webpage where they are asked further questions and are finally offered a “free” pair of sneakers worth $199.There is another catch. In order to claim their free sneakers, the user must pay $1. The user is advised that they will also be charged $49.99 a month for the subscription at the end of the month if they do not cancel. The user is told they can cancel at any point.On the payment screen the user is told that the payment will be processed by organizejobs.net. Proceeding with the payment will see the user charged $1, followed by the subscription cost of $49.99 in 7 days.The campaign is being run on WhatsApp, although similar scams have been conducted via email and SMS messages. Several variations along the same theme have also been identified using different shoe manufacturers.The link supplied in the WhatsApp message appears to be genuine, using the official domain for the country in which the user is located. While the domain looks correct, this is an example of a homoglyph attack. Instead of the domain adidas.de, the i is replaced with a vertical line – a homoglyph attack.These types of scams are commonplace. Homoglyph scams take advantage of the ability to use non-ASCII characters in domain names. Similar scams use a technique called typosquatting – where domains closely matching real brand names are registered: Incorrect spellings for instance, such as “Addidas” instead of Adidas, or with an i replaced with a 1 or an L.In this case, the attackers appear to be earning a commission for getting users to sign up, although disclosing debit and credit card details could easily see the information used to run up huge bills or drain bank accounts.There are various warning signs indicating this is an Adidas phishing scam. Close scrutiny of the domain will reveal it is incorrect. The need to share the message to contacts is atypical, being notified of a charge after being told the shoes are free, the failure to ask the user to choose a pair of shoes or even select their size, and an odd domain name is used to process payment. However, even with these tell-tale signs that the offer is not genuine, this adidas phishing scam is likely to fool many people.Be warned. If you receive any unsolicited WhatsApp message offering you free goods, assume it is a scam. by titanadmin | Jun 14, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A new type of ransomware attack could be on the horizon. The attack method, termed ransomcloud, was developed by a white hat hacker to demonstrate just how easy it is to launch an attack that results in cloud-based emails being encrypted.A successful attack will see the attacker gain full control of a cloud-based email account, allowing them to deploy a ransomware payload that encrypts all emails in the account. This method could also be used to gain full control of the account to use for spamming and other malicious purposes.The attack works on all cloud-based email accounts that allow third party applications account access via OAuth, which includes Gmail and Office 365 accounts.The ransomcloud attack starts with a phishing email. In this example, the message appears to have been sent by Microsoft offering the user the opportunity to sign up and use a new email spam filtering service called AntiSpamPro. The email includes the Microsoft logo and appears to be a new Microsoft service that provides the user with better spam protection.In order to take advantage of this service, the user is required to click a hyperlink in the email to give authorization for the new service to be installed. Clicking the link will result in a popup window appearing that requires the user to authorize the app to access their email account.Such a request is perfectly reasonable, as an app that offers protection against spam would naturally require access to the email account. Emails would need to be read in order for the app to determine whether the messages are genuine or spam. Clicking on ‘accept’ would give the attacker full control of the email account via an OAuth token. If access is granted, the user loses control of their email account.In this example, ransomware is installed which encrypts the body text of all emails in the account. An email then appears in the inbox containing the ransom note. The user is required to pay a ransom to regain access to their emails.Additionally, the attacker could claim the email account as their own and lock the user out, send phishing emails to all the user’s contacts, access sensitive information in emails, use email information to learn about the individual to use in future attacks such as spear phishing campaigns to gain access to their computer.The ransomcloud attack method is astonishingly simple to pull off and could be adopted by cybercriminals as a new way of extorting money and gaining access to sensitive information. by titanadmin | Jun 8, 2018 | Email Scams, Network Security, Spam Advice, Spam News | A new spam campaign has been identified that uses Excel Web Query files to deliver malware. In this case, the .iqy files are used to launch PowerShell scripts that give the attackers root access to a device. .iqy files are not usually blocked by spam filters, making the technique effective at silently delivering malware.The spam emails are being delivered via the Necurs botnet. Three spam campaigns have been detected by Barkly that use these attachments, although further campaigns are almost certain to be launched.Excel Web Query files obtain data from an external source and load it to Excel. In this case, the external data is a formula which is executed in Excel. The formula is used to run PowerShell scripts which, in at least one campaign, downloads a Remote Access Trojan (RAT) called FlawedAmmyy Admin – a tweaked legitimate remote administration tool that gives the attacker full control of a computer, allowing any number of malicious programs to be installed.The emails masquerade as purchase orders, unpaid invoices, and scanned documents – Common themes used in spam emails to deliver malware. These spam email campaigns often use Word documents with malicious macros. Macros are usually disabled by default. Through security awareness training, end users have been conditioned not to enable macros on documents from unknown senders, thus preventing malware downloads.Since most end users will not be used to receiving .iqy files, these attachments should arouse suspicion. Microsoft has also built in warnings to prevent these files from being run by end users. If an end user attempts to open one of these files it will trigger a warning alerting the user that the file may not be safe as it enables an external connection. The end user would be required to click enable before the connection is made and data is pulled into Excel.  A second warning would then be displayed, again requiring authorization. Only if both warnings are ignored will the script be allowed to run that downloads the malicious payload.There are two steps you can take to protect your endpoints and networks from these types of attacks. The first is to configure your email spam filter to quarantine any emails containing .iqy attachments. SpamTitan allows certain attachment types to be blocked such as executable files and iqy files. You can set the policy to quarantine, reject, or delete the emails. Since these types of files are not usually sent via email, rejecting the messages or deleting them is the safest option.You should also cover the use of these files in your security awareness training sessions and should consider sending an email alert to end users warning them about the threat.Further information on steps you can take to prevent malware infections spread via email can be found in our anti-spam tips page. You can find out more about the capabilities of SpamTitan by calling the sales team: by titanadmin | May 30, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | World Cup 2018 phishing scams can be expected over the coming weeks. There has already been a spike in World Cup related phishing emails and many malicious World Cup-themed domains have been registered.The World Cup may be two weeks away, but interest in the soccer extravaganza is already reaching fever pitch. The World Cup is watched by billions of people around the world, and there are expected to be around 5 million soccer fans expected to travel to Russia to see the matches live between June 14 to July 15. With such interest in the sporting event it should be no surprise that cybercriminals are poised to take advantage.Kaspersky Lab has already detected several World Cup 2018 phishing scams, with many of the early scams using emails to direct soccer fans to malicious websites offering the opportunity to buy tickets for the games.With tickets for the big matches scarce and demand outstripping supply, many fans are turning to touts to secure tickets to the big matches. Steps have been taken by FIFA to make it harder for ticket touts to operate, such as only allowing one ticket for a game to be purchased by any football fan. That individual is also named on the ticket. However, it is still possible for individuals to purchase tickets for guests and touts are taking advantage. The price for guest tickets is extortionate – up to ten times face value – and that price will likely rise as the event draws closer.Such high prices mean the opportunity of snapping up a cheaper ticket may seem too good to miss. However, there are plenty of scammers who have registered websites and are posing as touts and third parties that have spare tickets.Purchasing a ticket through any site other than the official FIFA is a tremendous risk. The only guarantee is that the price paid will be substantially higher, but there are no guarantees that a ticket will be sent after payment is made. Even if a ticket is purchased from an unofficial seller, it may turn out to be a fake. Worse, paying with a credit or debit card could see bank accounts emptied.Kaspersky Lab detected large numbers of malicious domains set up and loaded with phishing pages to take advantage of the rush to buy tickets ahead of the tournament. The websites are often clones of the official site.To add credibility, domains have been purchased that include the words worldcup2018 and variations along that theme. Cheap SSL certifications have also been purchased, so the fact that a website starts with HTTPS is no guarantee that a site is legitimate. Tickets should only be purchased through the official FIFA website.Why pay a high price for a ticket when there is a chance of obtaining one for free? Many competition-themed World Cup 2018 phishing emails have been detected. These emails are sent out in the millions offering soccer fans the change to win a free ticket to a match. To be in with a chance, the email recipient is required to register their contact details. Those details are subsequently used for further phishing and spamming campaigns. Stage two of the scam, where the ‘lucky’ registrant is told they have one tickets, involves opening an email attachment, which installs malware.Be wary of any communications from FIFA or any company claiming to be an official World Cup Partner. Kaspersky Lab has detected several emails that appear, at face value, to have been sent by FIFA or its World Cup 2018 partners. These emails usually request the recipient to update their account for security reasons.Visa is one brand in particular that is being spoofed in World Cup 2018 phishing emails for obvious reasons. Fake security alerts from Visa require credit card credentials to be entered on spoofed websites. If any security alert is received, visit the official website by typing in the official domain into the browser. Do not click the links contained in the emails.Airline tickets to cities staging World Cup matches may be difficult to find, and with more than 5 million fans expected in Russia for the World Cup, accommodation will be scarce. Scammers take advantage of the scarcity of flights and accommodation and the high prices being charged and offer cheap deals, usually via spam email. A host of malicious websites have been set up mimicking official travel companies and accommodation providers to fool the unwary into disclosing their credit card details. Retail brands are also being spoofed, with offers sent via email for cut price replica shirts and various other World Cup apparel.These World Cup 2018 phishing scams can usually be identified from the domain name, which needs to be checked carefully. These websites are often clones and are otherwise indistinguishable from the official websites.As the World Cup gets underway, there are likely to be waves of spam emails sent with news about matches, team information, betting odds, and juicy gossip about teams and players. Every major sporting event sees a variety of lures sent via spam email to get users to click links and visit malicious websites. Hyperlinks often direct users to webpages containing fake login pages – Facebook and Google etc. – where credentials need to be entered before content is displayed.These are just a few of the World Cup 2018 phishing scams that have been detected so far and a great deal more can be expected by the time the World Cup winner lifts the trophy on July 15.Standard security best practices will help soccer fans avoid World Cup 2018 phishing scams. Make sure you: by titanadmin | May 28, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Software | The UK Government’s Department for Digital, Culture, Media, & Sport has published its Cybersecurity Breaches Survey for 2018. The survey, conducted by Ipsos MORI, was a quantitative and qualitative survey conducted in the winter of 2017 on 1,519 UK businesses and 569 UK registered charities.The purpose of the cybersecurity breaches survey was to identify the nature and significance of cyberthreats, determine how prevalent cyberattacks are, and what is being done to prevent such attacks.The cybersecurity breaches survey revealed UK businesses and charities are being targeted by cybercriminals intent on gaining access to sensitive information, email accounts, corporate networks, and bank accounts and attacks are on the rise.43% of businesses and 19% of charities experienced a cybersecurity breach or cyberattack in the past 12 months with large businesses and charities more likely to be attacked. 72% of large businesses – those with more than 250 employees – and 73% of large charities – with incomes over £5 million – experienced a cyberattack in the past year.While not all security breaches result in material losses such as theft of data or personal information, when there is a material outcome the costs can be significant. The average costs of breaches with a material outcome is £3,100 for businesses and £1,030 for charities, although the larger the business, the greater the cost. Medium sized businesses have average costs of £16,100 and large businesses have an average breach cost of £22,300.The high probability of a breach occurring and the high cost of remediating breaches has seen cybersecurity become a priority for senior managers. The percentage of businesses (74%) and charities (53%) that say cybersecurity is a high priority has risen year on year and the percentage of businesses (30%) and charities (24%) that say cybersecurity is a low priority has fallen once again. Cybersecurity is also now a high priority for many small businesses (42%) having risen from 33% last year when the survey was conducted. Cybersecurity may be a high priority, but just 3 out of 10 businesses and under a quarter of charities have board members with a responsibility for cybersecurity.The most common type of breaches and cyberattacks involve fraudulent emails directing employees to malicious websites. 75% of UK businesses and 74% of UK charities that experienced a breach in the past year experienced these types of attacks. Email impersonation attacks were the second most common breach type with 28% of UK businesses and 27% of UK charities saying they had experienced these types of incidents in the past 12 months.Not only are these types of attacks common, they also cause the most disruption. 48% of UK businesses and charities said fraudulent emails and being directed to malicious websites caused the most disruption out of all cybersecurity breaches experienced, well ahead of malware infections which were rated as the most disruptive cyberattacks by 13% of UK businesses and 12% of UK charities.The cybersecurity breaches survey clearly highlights the importance of implementing robust defenses to prevent malicious emails from being delivered to employees’ inboxes and to ensure staff are well trained and taught how to identify malicious emails.TitanHQ offers two cybersecurity solutions that can help UK businesses block the most common and most disruptive types of cyberattack. SpamTitan is a powerful spam filtering solution that blocks more than 99.97% of spam emails and 100% of known malware from being delivered to end users’ inboxes.WebTitan is a cloud-based web filtering solution that prevents employees from visiting malicious websites, such as those used in phishing emails to steal credentials and spread malware.  Implementing these solutions is far cheaper than having to cover the cost of remediating cyberattacks.There is also clearly a problem with training in the UK. Only 20% of UK businesses and 15% of UK charities have had staff attend internal or external cybersecurity training in the past year, even though security awareness training has clearly been shown to be effective at reducing susceptibility to email-based attacks. by titanadmin | May 26, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News | According to data from the UK’s fraud tracking team, Action Fraud, there has been a massive rise in TSB phishing scams in the past few weeks. Customers of TSB have been duped into handing over their online banking credentials to scammers. Action Fraud is now receiving around 10 complaints a day from TSB customers who have fallen for phishing scams.The problem that made the scams possible was the separation of the TSB banking system from Lloyds Bank, of which TSB was part until 2015. TSB moved over to a new core banking system provided by Banco Sabadell, the Spanish bank which took over TSB. That transition happened in April. Unfortunately for TSB and its customers, it did not go smoothly.While migrating customer information to the new core banking system, many customers were locked out of their accounts and were unable to access their money. Some customers were presented with other customers’ bank accounts when they logged in online, and there have been cases of customers having money taken from their accounts without authorization, and transfers have been made to the wrong bank accounts. It is almost June, and the problems have still not been completely resolved.Customers starting to experience problems over the weekend of 21/22 April and the problems were understandably covered extensively by the media with many customers taking to Social Media sites to vent their spleens over the chaos. For scammers, this was too good an opportunity to miss.Action Fraud had received more than 320 reports of TSB phishing scams in the first three weeks in May. There were only 30 reports of such scams in the entire month of April. That’s an increase of 969%.The situation was ideal for scammers. Many TSB customers could not access their accounts, so there was little chance of customers realizing they had been defrauded until it was too late.TSB staff were overworked dealing with the IT problems and its helplines were overwhelmed with calls from customers unable to access their money. When customers realized they had been scammed they were unable to contact the bank quickly. There have been reports of customers seeing money taken from their accounts while they were logged in, yet they could not get through to customer support to stop transfers being made.The TSB phishing scams used a combination of SMS messages, emails, and telephone calls to obtain customers banking credentials. As is typical in these types of scams, customers were sent links and were asked to use them to login to their accounts. The websites the bank’s customers visited looked exactly how they should. The only sign that the website was not genuine was the URL, otherwise the website was a carbon copy of the genuine TSB website.Many victims of the scam had received an email or text messages, which was followed up with a voice call to obtain the 2-factor authentication code that would allow the scammers to gain access to the victim’s account. While the requests from the scammers may have seemed unusual or suspicious, this was an unusual situation for TSB customers.After that information was obtained, the scammers went to work and emptied bank accounts.According to data from cybersecurity firm Wandera, TSB has now jumped to second spot in the list of the financial brands most commonly used in impersonation attacks. Prior to the IT problems, TSB wasn’t even in the top five.With the bank’s IT issues ongoing, the TSB phishing scams are likely to continue at high levels for some time to come. The advice to TSB customers is to be extremely wary of any email, text message or call received from TSB bank. Scammers can spoof email addresses and phone numbers and can make text messages appear as if they have been sent by someone else. by titanadmin | May 17, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | Several GDPR phishing scams have been detected in the past few days as scammers capitalize on the last-minute rush by companies to ensure compliance ahead of the May 25, 2018 GDPR deadline. Be wary about any GDPR related email requests – they may be a scam.You will probably already be sick of receiving email requests from companies asking if they can continue sending you emails, but that is one of the requirements of GDPR. GDPR requires consent to be obtained to use – or continue to use – personal information. With previous privacy policies failing to comply with the new EU law, email requests are being sent to all individuals on mailing lists and those who have previously registered on websites to re-obtain consent.All companies that have dealings with EU residents are required to comply with GDPR, regardless of their location. Emails are therefore being sent from companies far and wide. Consumers are receiving messages from companies that they may have forgotten they had dealings with in the past. If personal data is still on file, email requests are likely to be sent asking for permission to retain that information.The masses of emails now being sent relating to GDPR has created an opportunity for scammers. GDPR phishing scams have been developed to fool users into revealing sensitive information under the guise of GDPR related requests. There have been many GDPR phishing scams identified in recent weeks. It is ironic that a regulation that aims to improve privacy protections for EU residents is being used to violate privacy.Phishers often spoof large, familiar brands as there is a greater chance that the recipient of the message will have an account with that company. The most popular global brands – Netflix, PayPal, Apple, and Google are all commonly impersonated.These impersonation scams can be highly convincing. A request is sent via email that seems perfectly reasonable, the emails appear to have been sent from the company, and the email address of the sender is spoofed to appear genuine. The emails contain branding and images which are familiar, and the messages can be almost indistinguishable from genuine communications.The aim is to get users to click on an embedded hyperlink and visit the company’s website and login. There is usually an urgent call to action, such as a security alert, threat of account closure, or loss of services.Apple is one such brand that has recently been impersonated in GDPR phishing scams. The aim of the attackers is to get Apple customers to login to a fake site and disclose their credentials. Once the credentials have been obtained, the scammers have access the user’s account, which includes financial information, credit card details, and other personal information.Redscan has detected Airbnb GDPR phishing scams recently. Users of its home sharing platform are required to update their contact details due to GDPR law in order to continue to use the platform. The request is entirely reasonable given so many companies are sending similar emails.The emails claim to be from Airbnb customer service, contain the correct images and branding, and direct users to a familiar looking website that differs only in the domain name. Users are asked to re-enter their contact information and payment card details.These scams are just two of several. More can be expected over the coming days in the run up to the compliance deadline and beyond. To avoid falling for the scams, make sure you treat all GDPR-related requests as potentially suspicious.The easiest way to avoid the scams is to visit the website of the brand by typing the correct address directly into the browser or using your usual bookmark. It should be clear when you login if you need to update your information because of GDPR. by titanadmin | Apr 24, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News | Microsoft has released new figures that show there has been a sizeable increase in tech support scams over the past year. The number of victims that have reported these scams to Microsoft increased by 24% in 2017. The true increase could be much higher. Many victims fail to report the incidents.According to Microsoft, in 2017 there were 153,000 reports submitted from customers in 183 countries who had been fooled by such a scam. While not all of the complainants admitted to losing money as a result, 15% said they paid for technical support. The average cost of support was between $200 and $400, although many individuals were scammed out of much more significant amounts. While victims may not willingly pay much more to fix the fictitious problem on their computers, if bank account details are provided to the scammers, accounts can easily be drained. One victim from the Netherlands claims a scammer emptied a bank account and stole €89,000.The rise in complaints about tech support scams could, in part, be explained by more scammers pretending to be software engineers from Microsoft, prompting them to report the incidents to Microsoft when they realize they have been scammed.However, the rise in tech support scams is backed up by figures released by the FBI. Its Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) received 86% more complaints in 2017 from victims of tech support scams. Around 11,000 complaints were received by IC3 about tech support scams last year and more than $15 million was lost to the scams.It is easy to see why these scams are so attractive for would-be cybercriminals. In many cases, little effort is required to pull off the scam. All that is required in many cases is a telephone. Cold calling is still common, although many of the scams are now much more sophisticated and have a much higher success rate.Email is also used. Some tech support scams involve warnings and use social engineering techniques to convince the recipient to call the helpline. Others involve malware, sent as an attachment or downloaded as a result of visiting a malicious website via a hyperlink supplied in the email.Once installed, the malware displays fake warning messages that convince the user that they have been infected with malware that requires a call to the technical support department.The use of popups on websites is common. These popups cannot be closed and remain on screen. Browser lockers are also common which serve the same purpose. To prompt the user to call the support helpline.While many more experienced users would know how to close the browser – CTRL+ALT+DEL and shut down the browser via Windows Task Manager – less experienced users may panic and call the helpline number, especially when the popup claims to be from a well-known company such as Microsoft or even law enforcement.The typical process used in these tech support scams is to establish contact by telephone, get the user to download software to remove a fictitious virus or malware that has previously been installed by the attackers. Remote administration tools are used that allows the scammer to access the computer. The user is convinced there is malware installed and told they must pay for support. Payment is made and the fictitious problem is fixed.These techniques are nothing new, it is just that more cybercriminals have got in on the act and operations have been expanded due to the high success rate. Fortunately, there are simple steps to take that can prevent users from falling for these tech support scams.To avoid becoming a victim of such a scam:If you believe you are a victim of a tech support scam, report the incident to the service provider who was spoofed and notify appropriate authorities in your country of residence.In the USA, that is the Federal Trade Commission or the FBI’s IC3; in the UK it is the National Fraud and Cyber Crime Reporting Center, the European Consumer Center in Ireland, or the equivalent organizations in other countries. by titanadmin | Apr 20, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | Two new phishing campaigns have been detected in the past few days that have seen phishers sink to new lows. An active shooter phishing campaign has been detected that uses fear and urgency to steal credentials, while a Syrian refugee phishing campaign takes advantage of compassion to increase the probability of victims paying ransom demands.Mass shootings at U.S schools are on the rise, with the latest incident in Parkland, Florida placing teachers and other staff on high alert to the threat of campus shootings. A rapid response is essential when an active shooter alert is issued. Law enforcement must be notified quickly to apprehend the suspect and children and staff must be protected.It is therefore no surprise that fake active shooter threats have been used in a phishing campaign. The emails are designed to get email recipients to click without thinking to receive further information on the threat and have been developed to cause fear and panic.The active shooter phishing campaign was being used in a targeted attack on a Florida school – an area of the country where teachers are hypersensitive to the threat of shootings, given recent events in the state.Three active shooter phishing email variants were reported to the anti-phishing and security awareness platform provider KnowBe4, all of which were used to direct recipients to a fake Microsoft login page where they were required to enter in their login credentials to view the alert. Doing so would give those credentials to the attacker.The email subject lines used – although other variants could also be in use – were:It is likely that similar campaigns will be conducted in the future. Regardless of the level of urgency, the same rules apply. Stop and think about any message before taking any action suggested in the email.Phishing campaigns often use crises, major world events, and news of sports tournaments to get users to click links or open email attachments. Any news that is current and attracting a lot of interest is more likely to result in users taking the desired action.There have been several Syrian refugee phishing campaigns run in recent months that take advantage of compassion to infect users with malware and steal their credentials. Now researchers at MalwareHunterTeam have identified a ransomware campaign that is using the terrible situation in Syria to convince victims to pay the ransom – By indicating the ransom payments will go to a very good cause: Helping refugees.Infection with what has been called RansSIRIA ransomware will see the victim presented with a ransom note that claims all ransom payments will be directed to the victims of the war in Syria. A link is also provided to a video showing the seriousness of the situation in Syria and links to a WorldVision document explaining the plight of children affected by the war.While the document and images are genuine, the claim of the attackers is likely not. There is no indication that any of the ransom payments will be directed to the victims of the war. If infected, the advice is not to pay and to try to recover files by other means. If you want to do your bit to help the victims of the war, make a donation to a registered charity that is assisting in the region. by titanadmin | Apr 17, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Providing security awareness training for employees helps to eradicate risky behaviors that could potentially lead to a network compromise. Training programs should cover all the major threats faced by your organization, including web-based attacks, phishing emails, malware, and social engineering scams via the telephone, text message, or social media channels.All too often, businesses concentrate on securing the network perimeter with firewalls, deploying advanced anti-malware solutions, and implementing other technological controls such as spam filters and endpoint protection systems, yet they fail to provide effective security awareness training for employees. Even when security awareness training programs are developed, they are often once-a-year classroom-based training sessions that are forgotten quickly.If you view security awareness training for employees as a once-a-year checkbox item that needs to be completed to ensure compliance with industry regulations, chances are your training will not have been effective.The threat landscape is changing rapidly. Cybercriminals often change their tactics and develop new methods to attack organizations. If your security program does not incorporate these new methods of attack, and you do not provider refresher security awareness training for employees throughout the year, your employees will be more likely to fall for a scam or engage in actions that threaten the security of your data and the integrity of your network.One recent study has highlighted just own ineffective many security awareness training programs are. Positive Technologies ran a phishing and social engineering study on ten organizations to determine how effective their security awareness programs were and how susceptible employees are to some of the most common email-based scams.These include emails with potentially malicious attachments, emails with hyperlinks to websites where the employee was required to enter their login credentials, and emails with attachments and links to a website. While none of the emails were malicious in nature, they mirrored real-world attack scenarios.27% of employees responded to the emails with a link that required them to enter their login credentials, 15% responded to emails with links and attachments, and 7% responded to emails with attachments.Even a business with 100 employees could see multiple email accounts compromised by a single phishing campaign or have to deal with multiple ransomware downloads. The cost of mitigating real world attacks is considerable. Take the recent City of Atlanta ransomware attack as an example. Resolving the attack has cost the city $2.7 million, according to Channel 2 Action News.The study revealed a lack of security awareness across each organization. While employees were the biggest threat to network security, accounting for 31% of all individuals who responded to the emails, 25% were team supervisors who would have elevated privileges. 19% were accountants, administrative workers, or finance department employees, whose computers and login credentials would be considerably more valuable to attackers. Department managers accounted for 13% of the responders.Even the IT department was not immune. While there may not have been a lack of security awareness, 9% of responders were in IT and 3% were in information security.The study highlights just how important it is not only to provide security awareness training for employees, but to test the effectiveness of training and ensure training is continuous, not just a once a year session to ensure compliance.Employee security awareness training programs can reduce susceptibility to phishing attacks and other email and web-based threats. If you want to improve your security posture, consider the following when developing security awareness training for employees: by titanadmin | Apr 9, 2018 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | Under Armour has experienced a massive MyFitnessPal data breach that has resulted in the personal information of 150 million users being accessed and stolen by a hacker.The data relates to users of the mobile MyFitnessPal app and the web version of the fitness and health tracking platform. The types of data stolen in the MyFitnessPal data breach include hashed usernames, passwords and email addresses.While payment card data is held by Under Armour, the information is processed and stored separately and was unaffected. Other highly sensitive information typically used for identity theft and fraud such as Social Security numbers was not obtained by the attacker.The MyFitnessPal data breach is notable for the sheer volume of data obtained and is the largest data breach to be detected this year; however, the theft of hashed data would not normally pose an immediate risk to users. That is certainly the case for the passwords, which were hashed using bcrypt – a particularly strong hashing algorithm. However, usernames and passwords were only hashed using the SHA-1 hashing function, which does not offer the same level of protection. It is possible to decode SHA-1 hashed data, which means the information could potentially be accessed by the attacker.Further, the attacker has had the data for some time. Under Armour became aware of the breach on March 25, 2018, but the attack took place more than a month before it was detected – some six weeks before the announcement about the data breach was made.Given the method used to protect the usernames and passwords, the data can be considered accessible and it is almost certain the person or persons responsible for the attack will attempt to monetize the data. If the attacker cannot personally decrypt the data, it is certain that the data will be some to someone who can.While it is possible that the bcrypt-encrypted passwords can be decoded, it is unlikely that decryption will be attempted. To do so would take a considerable amount of time and effort. Further, Under Armour is notifying affected users and is encouraging them to change their passwords as a precaution to ensure accounts cannot be accessed.While MyFitnessPal accounts may remain secure, that does not mean that users of MyFitnessPal will be unaffected by the breach. The attacker – or current holders of the data – will no doubt use the 150 million email addresses and usernames for phishing campaigns.Under Armour started notifying affected users four days following the MyFitnessPal data breach. Any user affected should login and change their password as a precaution to prevent their account from being accessed. Users also need to be alert to the risk from phishing.Phishing campaigns related to the MyFitnessPal data breach can be expected although the attackers will likely develop a variety of phishing emails to target breach victims.An incident of the scale of the MyFitnessPal data breach also poses a risk to businesses. If an employee was to respond to a phishing campaign, it is possible that they could download malware onto their work device – an action that could result in the business network being compromised.Attacks on this scale are becoming far more common, and with huge volumes of email addresses now being used for phishing campaigns, advanced spam filtering solutions for businesses are now a necessity.If you have yet to implement a spam filter, are unhappy with your current provider and the detection/false positive rate, contact TitanHQ to find out about SpamTitan – The leading anti-spam software for enterprises and SMBs. by titanadmin | Apr 6, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A recent Lazio phishing scam has potentially resulted in a €2 million loss for the Italian Serie A football team, which made the final installment of a transfer of a football player to the bank account of a scammer.The Lazio phishing scam involved some insider knowledge as the scammer was aware that part of the transfer fee for a player was outstanding. An email was carefully crafted and sent to the Italian football team that appeared to have come from representatives of the Dutch football club Feyenoord. In the email the outstanding balance for the player Stefan de Vrij was demanded. Stefan de Vrij had joined Lazio from Feyenoord in 2014.The email looked official and appeared to have been sent from a legitimate source. The accounts department at the Italian club responded and proceeded with the transfer of funds – approximately $2,460,840 – to the bank account as requested. However, the bank account details supplied in the email were not those of Feyenoord.When Feyenoord was contacted, the club denied all knowledge of any email communication about the player and confirmed that no funds had been received. The money had been paid to a Dutch bank account, but not one held by any staff at the club, nor any representative of the player.The payment has been tracked and Lazio is attempting to recover the funds. It is not yet known whether the money has been recovered and if that will be possible.The Lazio phishing scam has certainly made the headlines, but many similar attacks go unreported. Scams such as this are commonplace, and businesses are being fooled into making huge transfers of funds to criminals’ accounts.While this attack clearly involved some insider knowledge, that information can easily be gained with a simple phishing email. If the CFO of an organization can be fooled into revealing their email login credentials, the account can be accessed and a treasure trove of information can be found. The account can then be used to send an email request to a member of the accounts department or a company that is in the process of making a sizeable purchase.The attacker can match the writing style of the CTO and copy the usual format of email requests. All too often the recipient is fooled into making the transfer.This type of scam is called business email compromise – or BEC – and it is costing businesses billions. One recent report estimates the total losses to BEC attacks alone is likely to reach $9 billion in 2018.These scams are far different to the typical phishing scams of years gone by where huge numbers of emails were sent in the hope of a few individuals responding. These attacks are highly targeted, the recipient is extensively researched, and a great deal of time is spent conducting the attack. As the Lazio phishing scam showed, it is certainly worth the time and effort.Businesses need to protect themselves against these types of phishing attacks, but there is no silver bullet. Layered defenses are essential. Businesses need to develop an anti-phishing strategy and purchase anti-phishing security solutions. An advanced spam filtering solution is a must, DMARC should be implemented to prevent brand abuse, and security awareness training for staff is essential. Policies should also be developed and implemented that require two-factor verification on any wire transfer over a certain threshold.Even if an email filter could not block the Lazio phishing email and the email was so believable to fool a security aware employee, a quick telephone call to confirm the request could have highlighted the scam for what it was. by titanadmin | Mar 6, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software | Phishing attacks in healthcare are to be expected. Healthcare providers hold vast quantities of data on patients. Hospitals typically employ hundreds or thousands of members of staff, use many third-party vendors, and historically they have had relatively poor cybersecurity defenses compared to other industry sectors. That makes them an attractive target for phishers.Phishing is a method of gaining access to sensitive information which typically involves a malicious actor sending an email to an employee in which they attempt to get that individual to reveal their login credentials. This is achieved using social engineering techniques to make the email recipient believe the email is a genuine.  For instance, a security alert could inform the email recipient that an online account has been compromised and a password change is required. They are directed to a spoofed website where they are asked to login. The site is fake but looks genuine.Credentials are entered and passed to the attacker who uses them to gain access to that individual’s account. Phishing can also involve malware. Emails attempt to convince the recipient to open a malware-infected attachment or download a malicious file from a compromised website.HIPAA Rules require healthcare providers to implement administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to reduce the risk of cyberattacks and phishing. HIPAA only demands a minimum standard for data security be reached, although complying with HIPAA Rules can help to prevent phishing attacks in healthcare.HIPAA is not technologically specific on the defenses that should be used to protect patient data. Healthcare providers can choose appropriate defenses based on the results of a risk analysis.It is possible for healthcare organizations to be compliant with HIPAA Rules but still be vulnerable to phishing attacks. If healthcare providers are to block the majority of phishing attacks and truly secure patients’ data, they must go above and beyond the requirements of HIPAA.Recent phishing attacks in healthcare have prompted the HHS’ Office for Civil Rights to issue a warning about the risk from phishing.Attacks are now highly sophisticated and can be hard to detect. The emails are often free from spelling mistakes, have near perfect grammar, include brand images and logos, and appear to have been sent from genuine domains. The reasons given for taking a specific course of action are perfectly plausible as is the need for urgent action.OCR also highlights the rise in spear phishing attacks in healthcare. These attacks involve more targeted attempts to gain access to sensitive information and can be conducted on specific individuals or groups of individuals in an organization – The payroll or HR department for instance.These attacks often see a CEO or superiors impersonated to add legitimacy to the attack. These attacks tend to require the opening of attachments or visiting links to download malware. Spear phishing emails are also used to request bank transfers or for sensitive information to be sent via email – W2-Forms of employees for instance. Many healthcare employees have been fooled by these scams.Listed below are some of the recent examples of phishing attacks in healthcare. This is just a small selection of incidents that have resulted in healthcare records being exposed or stolen. The reality is that many data breaches start with a phishing email. Security awareness training company Cofense suggests that as many as 91% of data breaches have their root in a phishing campaign.November 2017: 1,670 patients of Forrest General Hospital have their PHI exposed following a phishing attack on business associate HORNE.October 2017: Henry Ford Health System discovers several email accounts were compromised as a result of employees responding to phishing emails. The PHI of 18,470 patients may have been stolen.September 2017: Employees of UPMC Susquehanna responded to phishing emails with the attackers able to gain access to the PHI of 1,200 patients.September 2017: A phishing attack on Wisconsin-based Network Health resulted in the PHI of approximately 51,000 patients being exposed.August 2017: Chase Brexton Health Care in Maryland experienced a phishing attack that saw several email accounts compromised along with the PHI of 16,000 patients.July 2017: The Medical College of Wisconsin experienced a phishing attack that allowed attackers to gain access to email accounts and the PHI of 9,500 patients.July 2017: RiverMend Health employees responded to phishing emails and their accounts were accessed by the attackers. The PHI of 1,200 patients was potentially viewed or stolen.June 2017: A phishing attack on Elderplan Inc., saw several email accounts compromised along with the PHI of 22,000 individuals.June 2017: MJHS Home Care experienced a phishing attack that saw email access gained by an unauthorized individual. The compromised email accounts contained the PHI of 6,000 patients.HIPAA does not specifically mention spam filters, but since phishing is used to target employees via email, spam filtering can be considered essential. By filtering out the majority of spam and malicious messages there is less potential for an employee to click on a malicious link or open a malware infected email attachment.SpamTitan is a cloud-based anti-spam service that blocks more than 99.9% of spam emails from being delivered to inboxes and has a 0.03% false positive rate. Dual antivirus engines (Bitdefender/ClamAV) ensure malicious email attachments are blocked.Healthcare employees are the last line of defense, so it is important for them to be able to recognize email threats and anti-phishing training is a requirement of HIPAA. In July 2017, OCR issued advice to healthcare organizations on anti-phishing training in its cybersecurity newsletter.OCR also recommends using multi-factor authentication to ensure email accounts are not compromised when a password is guessed or stolen. Software and operating systems must be kept up to date and fully patched to prevent vulnerabilities from being exploited, and anti-virus and anti-malware solutions should be deployed to prevent infection. Regular backups can also prevent data loss in the event of a malware or ransomware infection. by titanadmin | Feb 28, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | This month Adobe patched a critical use-after-free vulnerability in Adobe Flash Player that affects Windows 10, Mac, Chrome, and Linux operating systems. If exploited, an attacker can gain full control of an unpatched device.Adobe reports that an exploit for the vulnerability – tracked as CVE-2018-4878 – has been identified and is being used in attacks on Windows 10 devices.At the time that the patch was issued, only a limited number of attacks had been detected. However, researchers at Morphisec report the vulnerability is now being exploited in a massive spam email campaign that is targeting users in the United Kingdom and United States. While the spam campaign was relatively short-lived, large quantities of emails were sent and further spam campaigns can be expected.The emails include a shortlink which, if clicked, downloads a Word document from a recently registered domain. Opening the document sees a command prompt opened that is injected with Shellcode that connects to the attackers’ C2. Once a connection is made, a DLL file is downloaded and executed using regsvr32. According to Morphisec this bypasses whitelisting solutions. A SWF Flash file is then extracted which also had a low detection rate and the vulnerability is exploited.What makes the attack particularly dangerous is the poor detection rate by AV solutions. In a recent blog post Morphisec said in its tests, only 1/67 AV firms on VirusTotal identified the email attachment as malicious.The shortened goo.gl URLs used in the emails are difficult to detect as malicious and look similar to those used in legitimate email campaigns. The number of links being opened also corresponds with standard email campaigns, with high numbers of clickthroughs as the emails hit inboxes. The figures show that many email recipients have been fooled by the campaign.This email campaign shows why it is so important for patches to be applied promptly, especially when there are active exploits for a vulnerability in the wild. This is just one campaign, and there are likely to be many conducted using the Flash exploit.However, despite the risks from slow patching, many companies take weeks, months, or in some cases years before patches are applied, leaving them extremely vulnerable to attack. by titanadmin | Feb 26, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A Colorado Department of Transportation ransomware attack on February 21, 2018 affected at least 21 computers preventing files from being accessed by employees. A prompt response to the ransomware attack limited the harm caused, although to prevent the spread of the ransomware more than 2,000 computers were shut down.The attack has already caused considerable disruption, which is ongoing as the cleanup operation continues.The DOT says it received a ransom demand which would need to be paid in order to obtain the keys to unlock encrypted files, but that the DOT has no intention of paying any money to the attackers. Instead the firm has called in an external cybersecurity firm (McAfee) to restore data on the affected workstations and ensure all devices are clean and protected from infection. All encrypted files will be recovered from backups.Fortunately, the ransomware attack was limited to certain endpoints. Other computer systems that are used with surveillance cameras and traffic alerts were not affected.The Colorado Department of Transportation ransomware attack is one of several high-profile attacks involving SamSam ransomware to have been reported this year. Hancock Health Hospital in Indiana was one notable victim. The hospital was issued with a ransom demand and paid the attackers for the keys to unlock the encryption, even though backups could have been used to recover files. A Bitcoin payment worth approximately $55,000 is believed to have been paid. The payment was believed to be considerably less than the cost of disruption while files were recovered from backups.Another Indiana hospital – Adams Memorial Hospital was also attacked with a variant of SamSam ransomware, and Allscripts – an electronic health record provider – also suffered an attack that took down some of its web services.SamSam ransomware first surfaced in 2015, and while some antivirus and antimalware solutions can detect the malware, the attackers continue to release new variants that are much better at evading detection.Bleeping Computer reported on January 19 that one of the Bitcoin wallets used by the gang involved in SamSam ransomware campaign had already made approximately $300,000 from ransom payments, although that figure will almost certainly be higher since multiple Bitcoin wallets are believed to be used and the campaign is ongoing.On February 15, Secureworks reported that the profits from the attacks had increased to at least $350,000, with the firm attributing the attacks to a hacking group called Gold Lowell.It is unclear how the Colorado Department of Transportation ransomware attack occurred. Some sources report that the attack involved phishing emails, although Gold Lowell’s modus operandi is leveraging vulnerabilities in Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) services.With the campaign ongoing, all businesses should be alert to the threat from phishing and RDP attacks. Spam filters, such as TitanHQ’s cloud-based anti-spam service, are essential as is anti-phishing training for employees. If RDP is necessary, strong passwords should be set and controls implemented to reduce the potential for brute force attacks. Rate limiting on login attempts for example. It is also important to make sure that multiple data backups are performed to ensure files can be recovered in the event of an attack. by titanadmin | Feb 23, 2018 | Email Scams, Industry News, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News | A new report has been released that shows there has been a massive rise in the global cost of cybercrime, highlighting the seriousness of the threat from hackers and scammers. 2017 global cybercrime costs exceeded $600 billion, according to the McAfee report. That represents a 20% increase since 2014, when the global cybercrime costs were calculated to be around $500 billion. The current global cybercrime costs equate to 0.8% of global GDP.The report shows that in spite of increases in cybersecurity spending, hackers and scammers are still managing to breach organizations’ defenses and gain access to sensitive data, login credentials, corporate bank accounts, and intellectual property.Any calculation of global cybercrime costs involves some margin of error, as the figures cannot be totally based on reported losses by businesses. Many companies do not disclose details of data breaches, and even fewer publish information of the financial impact of cyberattacks. When details about financial losses are published, typically only a fraction of the losses are reported. In many cases the losses are not known until many years after the event. It is therefore difficult to obtain a true picture of the losses due to cybercrime because of the shortage of data.To try to gain an accurate picture of the total cost of cybercrime, McAfee had to turn to the same modelling techniques used by government agencies to determine the costs of criminal activities such as drug trafficking, prostitution, maritime piracy, and organizational crime groups.McAfee is not the only company to make these predictions. Compared to some reports the figures from McAfee seem quite conservative. The true cost could be considerably higher.McAfee reports that several factors have contributed to the large increase in cybercrime costs over the past few years.  The growth in popularity of ransomware has played a part. Ransomware has proved to be a particularly plump cash cow, allowing cybercriminals to rake in millions by extorting companies. The anonymity of cryptocurrencies has helped these cybercriminal gangs obtain payments without detection, while the use of TOR has helped the gangs stay under the radar of law enforcement agencies.Ransomware-as-a-service has also boosted profits for cybercriminals. The increase in the number of individuals conducting attacks has made it possible to increase the scale of operations and distribute the malicious code more effectively. State-sponsored hacks have also increased, including attacks aimed at sabotaging businesses and critical infrastructure as well as major heists that have seen millions of dollars stolen.McAfee cites research showing around 300,000 new malware samples are now being identified on a daily basis, while data breaches are exposing a staggering 780,000 records a day.Personal records can sell for big bucks on darknet forums; however, one of the biggest costs is the theft of intellectual property, which McAfee estimates has resulted in at least 25% of the annual losses to cybercrime. When patented processes are obtained, the benefits of millions in research and development is lost and companies can lose their competitive advantage.One thing is clear from the report. With global cybercrime costs rising, and the sophistication and frequency of attacks increasing, companies have little alternative than to invest more in cybersecurity and develop more sophisticated defenses. by titanadmin | Feb 22, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam News, Spam Software, Website Filtering | Cybercriminal gangs operating in Nigeria have been discovered to be using phishing kits in a highly sophisticated phishing campaign that has seen millions of dollars obtained from big businesses.The scammers are regularly fooling employees into revealing their email login credentials – The first stage of the complex scam. The ultimate goal of the attackers is to gain access to corporate bank accounts and convince accounts department employees to make sizeable transfers to their accounts.According to research conducted by IBM, these scams have been highly successful. Fortune 500 companies are being targeted and losses have been estimated to be of the order of several million dollars.These scams take time to pull off and considerable effort is required on the part of the scammers. However, the potential rewards are worth the effort. Bank transfers of tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars can be made and business email accounts can be plundered.In order to pull off the scam, the attackers must first gain access to at least one corporate email account. Access is gained using phishing emails, with social engineering tactics used to convince employees to click on a malicious link. Those links direct the email recipients to malicious DocuSign login pages where credentials are harvested. These malicious pages have been created on multiple websites.According to IBM, the gang behind this campaign has created more than 100 of these pages, many of which have been loaded onto genuine websites that have been compromised by the attackers.Once access to one email account is gained, it is easy to obtain email addresses from the contact list to fool other employees. When an email account is accessed, the attackers search the account for messages involving accounts and payments. The attackers then send emails carrying on conversations between staff members, inserting themselves into conversations and continuing active discussions.“The attackers typically took a week between the point they gained initial access to a user’s email account and the time they started setting up the infrastructure to prepare a credible ruse,” said IBM’s X-Force researchers.  “During this time, they likely conducted extensive research on the target’s organizational structure, specifically focusing on the finance department’s processes and vendors.”By setting up email rules and filters, it is possible to block genuine conversations between the employees that could uncover the scam. By doing this, all conversations take place between a specific individual and the attacker.This method of attack allows the attackers to gain access to banking credentials and send highly convincing emails requesting transfers to their accounts. Targeted employees are unlikely to be unaware that they are not emailing a legitimate contact.This is a manual, labor-intensive scam involving no malware. That has the advantage of allowing the attackers to evade anti-malware technologies.While these scams are complex, they start with a simple phishing email to gain access to a corporate email account. Once access to an email account has been gained, stopping the scam becomes much harder. The easiest time to prevent such an attack is at the initial stage, by preventing the phishing emails from reaching the inboxes of employees and training employees how to identify phishing emails.That requires an advanced spam filtering solution that can identify the common signatures of spam and scam emails. By setting aggressive filtering policies, the vast majority of spam emails will be captured and quarantined. With the SpamTitan cloud-based anti-spam service, that equates to more than 99.9% of all spam and malicious emails. SpamTitan also has a particularly low false positive rate – less than 0.03% – ensuring genuine emails are still delivered.No spam solution can be 100% effective, so it is also important to prepare the workforce and train staff how to identify malicious emails. Security awareness and anti-phishing training allows organizations to create a ‘human firewall’ to complement technical solutions.Spear phishing – highly targeted email attacks – are harder to block, but it is possible to implement solutions to prevent scams such as this from resulting in credentials being obtained. In this campaign, links are sent in emails. By implementing a web filtering solution, those links can be blocked. In tandem with a spam filter, organizations with a security aware workforce will be well protected from phishing attacks.Further, the use of two-factor authentication is an important security measure to implement. This will prevent attackers from using an unknown device to access an email account.For further information on web filters and spam filters, and the benefits of installing them at your organization, contact the TitanHQ team today and take the first step toward improving your defenses against sophisticated phishing scams. by titanadmin | Feb 21, 2018 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Software | A new IRS-themed rapid ransomware email scam has been detected that uses the threat of significant financial penalties for late tax payments to fool victims into installing ransomware. Tax season is well underway and cybercriminals have been increasing their efforts to obtain tax credentials to file fraudulent tax returns in the names of their victims. Businesses are the prime targets, as a successful scam can see the tax credentials of hundreds or thousands of employees obtained from a single response to an scam email.However, it is not only tax fraudsters that are taking advantage of tax season. Ransomware attacks are also likely, as has been highlighted by a recently uncovered email scam that impersonates the IRS.The purpose of this scam is to install Rapid ransomware. Rapid ransomware is a relatively new ransomware variant first detected in January 2018. In contrast to many ransomware variants that encrypt files and then terminate, rapid ransomware remains active after encryption and will encrypt any further files that are created on the infected device.In addition to encrypting files, the ransomware deletes Windows shadow volume copies and disables automatic repair to hamper any attempts to restore files without paying the ransom. There is currently no decryptor for Rapid ransomware. Recovery will depend on backups being available or the ransom demand must be paid.The Rapid ransomware email scam is similar to many other scams conducted during tax season. The emails are well written and plausible. There is urgency to encourage rapid action and a threat of financial penalties if the emails are ignored.The emails have the subject line: ‘Please Note – IRS Urgent Message 164’ and contain a zipped notification attachment which email recipients are required to open to obtain further information.In the body of the email, the recipient is led to believe they have significant tax arrears related to a property. The recipient is told that no action is taken by the IRS when tax arrears are cleared within 4-6 months of their due date, but since the recipient’s tax is 7 months out of date they are liable for a fine. They are told that if they do not respond to the email within one day and attempt to rectify the situation, ‘significant charges and fines may apply’. They are also told to open and study the attached document. The zip file contains a Word file containing a macro. If allowed to run, the macro downloads a PowerShell file, which in turn downloads Rapid ransomware.Security aware individuals should be able to identify signs that the email is not genuine. First, the email is addressed ‘Dear Customer.’ In the event of the IRS contacting an individual about tax arrears, it would be likely that the email would be addressed using the individual’s name. However, such a situation would not occur. The IRS has confirmed in numerous warnings about phishing emails that it does not initiate contact about tax arrears via email. Further, tax arrears are serious, but not so serious that a response of 1 day would be given for a response.The scammers behind this campaign have made some glaring mistakes in their campaign. The email address spoofed has the domain nottscc.gov.uk. While the email address looks official, it relates to Nottinghamshire County Council in the UK and the IRS is the American tax agency. However, many devices do not show the full domain so this may not be noticed. Another major error is the use of German language in the Word document, including instructions for enabling the macro.Due to the errors made by the scammers, in particular the use of German and a UK local government email address – this email scam should be easily detected by employees and consumers, but such mistakes are not always made. The email is plausible, and otherwise it would be likely that many individuals would be fooled by such a scam.For businesses, these scams can prove incredibly costly. In this case, there is no set ransom payment. Victims need to email the scammers to find out how to pay the ransom and how much is being charged. If the emails come from a business domain, the ransom payment would likely be increased. Further, ransomware can spread laterally within a network and result in file encryption on multiple endpoints and servers. With ransoms typically charged for each infected device, the costs can be considerable.This Rapid ransomware email scam highlights the need for spam protections to be put in place to prevent malicious emails from being delivered. With SpamTitan implemented, more than 99.9% of spam email is blocked, preventing employees from having their phishing email identification skills tested.It is also important to provide security awareness training to employees to teach them the skills they need to identify scams such as this. Not all email scams will be as easy to detect as this one. Training goes a long way toward ensuring that when emails slip past security defenses they are quickly identified by the workforce. by titanadmin | Feb 19, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | Saturn ransomware is a new threat recently identified by security researchers at MalwareHunterTeam. Saturn ransomware takes its name from the extension added to encrypted files (.saturn).While it is easy to determine the ransomware variant used in an attack, this will be of little use to victims. There is currently no decryptor available to recover files.A single infection can rapidly spread laterally, encrypting files on an infected device as well as network shares. Recovering files from backups may prove difficult. Saturn ransomware searches for and deletes shadow volume copies, clears the Windows backup catalog, and also disables Windows startup repair.If no viable backup exists, the victim must pay a ransom payment in bitcoin of approximately $300 per infected device. If payment is not made within 7 days of infection, the ransom payment doubles.As with many new ransomware variants, attacks can come from all angles. That is because the new ransomware variant is being offered to affiliates as ransomware-as-a-service.Ransomware-as-a-service allows the malware developers to maximize the number of infections – and profits – by recruiting a large team of distributors to send spam emails, load the ransomware onto malicious websites, and install the malicious software by taking advantage of poor security defenses. In exchange for their efforts, affiliates are given a percentage of the ransom payments that are received.The developers of Saturn ransomware have made it as easy as possible for affiliates. A portal has been developed that allows affiliates to obtain copies of the ransomware binaryeither embedded in exe files or Office, PDF files or other documents. To tempt individuals into using this ransomware variant instead of other RaaS offerings, the developers are offering a large percentage of the ransom payments to affiliates – 70%.The ease of running campaigns together with the high potential rewards for infection means many affiliates are likely to start using the new ransomware variant in attacks. The new malware is already being offered on various darknet forums.Spam email is the easiest way of spreading ransomware. Massive spam campaigns require little skill and there is no shortage of email addresses for sale on the dark web. We can therefore expect this new ransomware variant to be widely distributed over the coming weeks.With spam email likely to be the main vector of attack, one of the best defenses to deploy to prevent infection is to use anti spam software such as SpamTitan. SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam email. With SpamTitan in place, emails can be blocked and will not reach end users inboxes.However, no single defense can provide total protection from ransomware attacks. Layered defenses are required. Antivirus and antimalware solutions should be used, although signature and heuristics-based defenses will not provide total protection. Businesses should also use a technology that identifies changes to files to ensure that if infection occurs, rapid action can be taken to limit the spread of the ransomware.Multiple copies of files should also be made to ensure that should the unthinkable happen, data will not be lost. Businesses should make at least three backups, stored on two different media, with at least one copy stored securely off-site. Good patch management policies are also required to prevent vulnerabilities from being leveraged to install the ransomware.Technical defenses are essential, but don’t forget the human element. Ransomware spread via spam email requires some user interaction – the opening of an email attachment or the clicking of a link. Security awareness training and phishing email simulations are now a necessity to reduce user susceptibility to email-based attacks. by titanadmin | Feb 16, 2018 | Email Scams, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam Advice, Spam Software | A new malware campaign has been detected that uses Microsoft Word without macros. Opening a Word document sent via email will not generate the usual warnings that macros must be enabled.Employees may have been warned to be wary of any emails containing attachments, and never to enable macros on documents received via email. However, the use of Microsoft Word without macros means that even opening email attachments can see malware downloaded, if patches have not been applied.The multi-stage infection process uses the CVE-2017-11822 Word vulnerability to install an information stealer. CVE-2017-11822 was patched by Microsoft last year, although companies that have not patched their systems recently will be vulnerable to this attack.CVE-2017-11822 is a vulnerability in Office Equation Editor. The bug has been present in Microsoft Office for the past 17 years. Last year, Microsoft rated the code execution vulnerability as important rather than critical, but many security professionals disagreed and claimed the vulnerability was very dangerous as the bug could be exploited to run arbitrary code and the vulnerability was present in all Office versions.Microsoft Equation Editor is an application that allows the insertion and editing of complex equations in Office documents as OLE items. Last year, security researchers were able to exploit the vulnerability to run a sequence of commands, including the downloading of files from the Internet. This campaign similarly triggers the downloading of a document – a Rich Text File (RTF) via an OLE object embedded in the Word document.The OLE object opens the RTF file which uses the vulnerability to run a MSHTA command line, which downloads and runs an HTA file containing a VBScript. The VBScript unpacks a PowerShell script, which in turn downloads and runs the information-stealing malware. The purpose of the malware is to steal passwords from web browsers, email accounts and FTP servers.The email campaign has been developed to target businesses. So far, four email templates have been detected by SpiderLabs researchers, although more will almost certainly be used over the coming days and weeks.The four emails intercepted by have the subject lines:While a patch was released last year to address the vulnerability, Microsoft has taken further steps this Patch Tuesday by removing some of the functionality of Microsoft Equation Editor to prevent CVE-2017-11882 from being exploited.Businesses can mitigate this attack in three main ways: by titanadmin | Feb 14, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | Every February, Valentine’s day email scams are to be expected and this year has been no different. On Monday, a massive new phishing campaign was launched. The Necurs botnet was used to deliver millions upon millions of dating, romance and Valentine’s themed emails.Dating scams increased significantly in January and continued in February. You have probably seen the emails already in one of your inboxes.The emails appear to have been sent by Russian women desperate to find love. Unsolicited emails from attractive women complete with suggestive pictures and messages claiming the recipient is particularly attractive are certain to be spam, yet the emails are effective. The FBI’s figures indicate around $230 million is lost to these scams alone each year. In 2016, the FBI received around 15,000 complaints about financial losses as a result of dating and romance scams.There were two major peaks in spam email volume between January 15 and 17 and January 29 and February 2 when around 35 million dating spam messages were delivered via the Necurs botnet. Over 230 million messages were sent in a two-week period in January. The aim of the campaign is to obtain credit card details, payments to cover flights to bring the women over to the US, but in many cases the purpose is to fool the email recipient into downloading malware.Cybercriminals use all manner of tactics to entice users to click. Another effective technique, highlighted by security awareness training firms KnowBe4 and PhishMe, is the use of eCards, especially on Valentine’s Day. Links are sent that appear to be from legitimate eCard sites that require users to click the link to view a Valentine’s day card from a secret admirer. The purpose is to deliver malware.Valentine’s day email scams this year also include messages alerting the recipient about the failed delivery of flowers from Interflora and email attachments claiming to be delivery receipts.It is the likelihood of these emails being opened that makes defending against them a major headache for businesses. One single click is all it takes for malware to be installed, and since many malware variants can rapidly spread laterally, one click could be all it takes to compromise an entire network.This month has also seen plenty of Winter Olympics phishing campaigns conducted. Cybercriminals have been taking advantage of interest in the games to get their emails opened. Malicious links are used to direct users to websites that claim to have up to date news on the events, the competitors, fake news, and the results of events.The reality is these links direct users to phishing websites, exploit kits, and sites where malware is silently downloaded. With workers unable to watch the sports live at work, these malicious emails stand a high chance of being opened.With Valentine’s day and the Winter Olympics, February has been a busy month for scammers and with the Pyeongchang Winter Olympics still in full flow, businesses need to be on high alert.Fortunately, there is one technology in particular that can help businesses counter these email-based threats. An advanced spam filtering solution: The most effective defense against email-based attacks. An advanced spam filter such as SpamTitan blocks more than 99.9% of spam emails, 100% of known malware, and ensures that phishing and other malicious emails do not reach inboxes.To find out more about SpamTitan – the best spam filter for business use – contact the TitanHQ team today. by titanadmin | Jan 31, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | A new FedEx phishing scam has been detected that appears to be targeting universities and businesses. Spam emails with the subject line ‘FedEx Delivery Notification’ are sent to users that explain FedEx was unable to deliver a package. The email claims the package was over the allowable weight limit and did not qualify for free delivery.The email recipients are informed that in order to collect the package, they must visit their local FedEx depot in person. The package will not be released unless the user presents a label to the dispatcher, which the user is required to print.The sophisticated FedEx phishing scam involves no email attachments, only a link. However, the link does not appear to be a malicious site. The attackers are using Google Drive to distribute their malware.This is an increasingly common tactic that abuses trust of Google. Since the website is genuine – drive.google.com –  users are less likely to believe that they are being scammed. The hyperlink will direct the user to Google Drive and will trigger the download of a file called Lebal copy.exe. An executable file that if run, will install malware.Many people know not to run executable files, although in this case the file is disguised as a PDF and has the PDF icon. If known file extensions are not configured to be displayed on the user’s computer – which is now common- they would not be aware that the file is not a PDF.The latest scam was uncovered by researchers at Comodo, who identify the malware as a Trojan called TrojWare.Win32.Pony.IENG that steals cookies and credentials. It is capable of stealing information from FTP clients, attempts to obtain and access cryptocurrency wallets, and extracts a wide range of user data and transmits the information to its command and control server. The malware uses various tactics to avoid detection by anti-malware and anti-virus defences.According to Comodo, so far there have been 23 businesses, several government employees, and five university employees that have fallen for the scam. Since those businesses were protected by anti-virus software that was able to block the malware they avoided infection, although many others will not be so fortunate.Protecting against scams like this requires layered defenses and user vigilance. Spam filters should be used by businesses to detect and quarantine spam emails such as this. Links to Google Drive can be difficult to block, as Google Drive is a legitimate website.  Antivirus and anti-malware defenses must therefore be in place to detect the malicious download.Businesses should not forget the human element of the security chain. Security awareness training and phishing simulations can help users to detect a FedEx phishing scam such as this.A new sophisticated Netflix scam has appeared in the past few days. The emails claim users will have their Netflix membership suspended due to a problem processing the most recent payment.The email appears to have been sent from Netflix and includes all the appropriate branding, making the email look highly convincing. The subject line is ‘Suspension of your membership’.The email says there was a problem validating the most recent payment, and a link is supplied in the email that requires the user to validate their payment and billing information.Clicking the link directs the user to what appears to be the Netflix website where they are asked to go through a series of steps to validate their account. The validation process requires them to re-enter their payment card information. The failure to complete the step will result in the suspension of their Netflix account.The website contains the correct branding and looks exactly like the legitimate site. The URL is different, but the website is HTTPS and has the green padlock. A casual glance at the URL may not reveal there is anything wrong with the site.Spam filtering solutions such as SpamTitan can detect this type of scam, but users must exercise caution as not all phishing emails can be blocked.Users should carefully check the URL of any site they visit to make sure it is legitimate before entering sensitive information. Links sent in emails should be checked by hovering the mouse arrow over the link to find out the true URL.An email such as this should prompt the user to visit Netflix using their usual bookmark or by typing in the URL into their browser, rather than visiting any links in the email. by titanadmin | Jan 30, 2018 | Email Scams, Internet Security, Network Security, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | Phishing emails cost a North Carolina school district $314,000 to resolve and caused considerable disruption while the infection was removed.The high cost of resolving the attack was due to a particularly nasty and difficult to remove malware variant called Emotet malware which had been installed on endpoints and servers after employees responded to phishing emails.The Rockingham County School District was attacked in late November. Numerous employees of the school district received a phishing email in their inboxes which appeared to be an incorrect invoice from their anti-virus provider. The emails contained an attachment and asked users to open the file to confirm. Doing so triggered the infection process, that resulted in the Emotet virus being downloaded.The purpose of the malware is to obtain banking credentials. To ensure the maximum number of credentials are stolen, the virus is able to spread to other users. It was the attempt to spread that saw the infection detected. Some employees of the school district discovered their Google email accounts had been disabled as a result of spamming, which prompted an investigation. Internet access through web browsers was also impacted, suggesting a widespread malware infection.While a malware infection was confirmed, removing the virus was not an easy task. There is no anti-virus software program that can remove the virus and prevent infection. The school district was able to clean and reimage some infected devices, but they were subsequently reinfected.Unable to resolve the malware infection internally, the school district was forced to bring in external security consultants. In total, approximately a dozen infected servers had to be rebuilt to remove the infection. The school district also had to cover the cost of reimaging 3,000 workstations. The recovery is expected to involve some 1,200 on-site hours by IT staff and the process is expected to take up to a month.During that time, the school district has had limited access to computers and had to loan around 200 Windows devices for key personnel. In order to cover the cost of the phishing attack, the school district took $314,000 in funds from its coffers.“We feel like the $314,000 will get us back to where we were before we had the virus,” said school district Superintendent Rodney Shotwell.The high cost of the phishing attack and the disruption caused shows just how important it is to deploy an advanced anti spam software solution to prevent malicious emails from reaching inboxes, and the importance of providing security awareness training to all employees to help them identify potential phishing attacks. by titanadmin | Jan 29, 2018 | Email Scams, Phishing & Email Spam, Spam News, Spam Software | What industries are the most susceptible to phishing scams? What industries must do more to prevent phishing attacks on their employees? Recent research shows organizations that fail to implement technological defenses to block phishing emails and do not provide phishing awareness training to their employees are likely to suffer costly data breaches.This year’s cost of a data breach study conducted by the Ponemon Institute suggests the average cost of mitigating a data breach is $3.62 million, while the FBI’s figures show that between 2013 and 2016, more than $1.6 billion was lost to phishing scams – Approximately $500 million a year. Phishing attacks on organizations have also been increasing year on year.Unfortunately, while public awareness of the threat from phishing has improved considerably in recent years, an alarming number of employees continue to fall for phishing scams. A recent survey conducted by the phishing awareness training company Knowbe4 showed an astonishing 27% of employees clicked on a potentially malicious link or opened an email attachment sent via its phishing simulation tests. In some industry sectors, more than a third of employees failed the phishing simulations.Many studies produce questionable results due to a low sample size. However, the Knowbe4 study used data from 11,000 organizations and 6 million users. The results of the study therefore paint an accurate picture of just how susceptible employees are to phishing attacks.Phishing simulations were run prior to the provision of security awareness training to obtain a baseline of the susceptibility of employees to phishing attacks. The results showed the industries most susceptible to phishing were insurance, manufacturing, retail, and non-profits. In the 1-249 employee category, 35.46% of insurance employees failed phishing tests, and 33.32% of employees failed the tests in the 250-999 employee category – The highest level of susceptibility of any industry sector in both categories.Manufacturing was second worse in the 1-249 employee category with a failure rate of 33.21% followed by not-for-profits on 32.63%. In the 250-999 employee category, manufacturing (31.06) and business services (31.01%) were second and third.The 1000+ employee category showed much reduced phishing susceptibility rates, ranging from business services on 19.40% to not-for-profits on 30.97%. Even the best performing industry sector saw almost 2 out of 10 employees fail phishing tests.90 days after implementing a phishing awareness program, susceptibility to phishing was dramatically reduced. In the insurance sector, susceptibility rates fell from 35% and 33% in the small and medium sized business categories to 13% and 16%. A massive improvement. Overall, after a year – once phishing awareness training programs had matured – the overall susceptibility rates fell to a level of around 1% to 2%, with the highest percentages at the 5% level.The survey shows just how important it is to provide ongoing training for the workforce to improve security awareness and the clear benefits of doing so.It will never be possible to reduce phishing susceptibility to zero, therefore organizations should ensure that phishing emails are not delivered inboxes in the first place, and for that, an advanced anti spam software solution such as SpamTitan is required.
Download the PDF here.The legitimacy of self-government rests on the consent of the governed. In our democratic republic, that consent is manifested through the administration of free and fair elections. But in 2016, our democratic process came under attack from a foreign state seeking to exercise power and influence in U.S. domestic politics. It’s possible that Russia believed that if it could interfere in the U.S. presidential election, it could change the course of American history.Last summer, Americans learned that Russian operatives were behind leaks at the Democratic National Committee (DNC).1 Those leaks exposed sensitive information about DNC staffers, including Social Security numbers, home addresses, and personal details that resulted in harassment, attempts at identity theft, and workplace marginalization.2 In January 2017, the country’s intelligence community unanimously confirmed that the Russian government—under orders from Russian President Vladimir Putin—interfered in the 2016 elections, engaging in a mass disinformation campaign to assist Donald Trump in winning the presidential election.3That was only the beginning. In June 2017, reports surfaced that Russian hackers infiltrated 39 state election systems in the lead-up to Election Day, while a top secret National Security Agency (NSA) report published by The Intercept in July revealed that Russian military intelligence, or the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU), sent spear-phishing emails to 122 email addresses associated with those likely “involved in the management of voter registration systems” in an attempt to probe or infiltrate voting databases.4 After successfully breaching election records in Illinois, hackers attempted to delete and alter voter information. The Illinois database contained the personal information—including names, birthdates, gender, driver’s license numbers, and partial Social Security numbers—of 15 million people.5 Bloomberg estimates that as many as 90,000 records were compromised.6According to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), there are no signs, as yet, that Russia tampered with vote totals or succeeded in removing eligible Americans from state voting lists.7 But we still do not have a full picture of what the Russians were doing, and the FBI has said that it is conducting multiple investigations into what happened.8 Intelligence experts warn that the 2016 U.S. election cycle is only a preview of what’s to come.9 Russia may have used the 2016 cycle as a testing ground to determine vulnerabilities in U.S. election databases in preparation for more sophisticated campaigns in future elections. As Sen. Angus King (I-ME) warned, “[T]hey are going to be back, and they’re going to be back with knowledge and information that they didn’t have before.”10Russia is not the only U.S. adversary honing its skills in cyberintrusion. North Korea and Iran have also engaged in destructive cyberattacks against Western democracies, and the Islamic State has made strategic use of the internet to advance its goals.11Unfortunately, our election infrastructure is woefully ill-prepared for future interference. Outdated voting machines, lack of verified paper ballots or records, and inadequate cybersecurity measures for voting machines and databases are just a few vulnerabilities that leave U.S. elections open to subversion by hostile entities—foreign and domestic—seeking to undermine the democratic process and even skew election results.12 While further efforts are needed to address the wider influence campaign that extended well beyond election systems, it is of extreme importance that America begins to invest in and update its election infrastructure to protect against future interference and disruption.13Protecting our elections is a matter of national security, requiring immediate action and coordination at all levels of government. In the lead-up to the 2016 general election, 33 states, along with 36 localities, requested assessment of their election systems by DHS.14 More requests have been made since November 2016.15 For its part, DHS has made clear, “[T]his is of the utmost urgency for the department and this government to ensure that we have better protections going forward.”16 Election officials and politicians at the local, state, and federal levels have a critical role to play.This issue brief details nine recommendations to address some of the most serious vulnerabilities in America’s election infrastructure:The right and ability to conduct free and fair elections transcend partisan politics.17 At the Senate Select Intelligence Committee hearing on June 21, 2017, Sen. Mark Warner (D-VA), vice chairman of the committee, reminded those in attendance that “only with a robust and comprehensive response will we be able to protect our democratic processes from even more dramatic incursions in the future.”18 The committee’s chairman, Sen. Richard Burr (R-NC), voiced a similar sentiment during the hearing, saying in reference to foreign interference, “In 2016, we were woefully unprepared to defend and respond and I’m hopeful that we will not be caught flatfooted again.”19 Finally, Sen. King declared, “[S]hame on us if we’re not prepared.”20U.S. election systems are not equipped to handle sophisticated cyberattacks and other interference. Even in the absence of a malicious campaign, the negative consequences of this vulnerability to the strength and resiliency of U.S. democracy and government are steep. A July 2017 poll conducted by The Hill found that one in four Americans will consider not participating in future elections due to concerns over cybersecurity.21 As Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) noted, “[I]t is really critical that people have confidence that when they go vote that vote is going to count and someone’s not going to come in electronically and change it.”22Luckily, there are practical steps that local, state, and federal officials can take to create resilient elections and protect self-government. In the words of Sen. Burr, “Together, we can bring considerable resources to bear and keep the election system safe.”23Voting machines that record votes and tally them are run on software that is vulnerable to cyberintrusions.24 Well-resourced hackers, whether funded by foreign governments or criminal syndicates, have the access, ability, and motivation to infect computerized voting machines and tallying systems across America. This can occur even if the machines are not connected to the internet. Attackers, for example, can deploy software such as Stuxnet and Brutal Kangaroo to target offline voting machines.25That is why there needs to be a paper ballot—which is software independent—for every vote cast. A paper ballot offers a record of voter intent, which will exist even if voting machines are attacked and data are altered. Paper ballots or records are necessary both to conduct meaningful postelection audits able to confirm the election outcomes, and to enable post-hoc correction in the event of malfunctions or security breaches. As described by Ed Felten, professor of computer science and public affairs at Princeton University, “If there is uncertainty after an election, either because of the possibility of tampering or just the possibility of error or malfunction, a paperless system … doesn’t have any way to go back to other evidence to figure out what really happened.”26 Most experts agree that paper ballots marked by the voter, either with a pen or via a ballot-marking device, are the easiest to audit.27 Some states still deploy electronic voting machines that can produce a paper record of voters’ choices on a paper roll, which voters can review. While paper-producing electronic machines can be used, they are not ideal for auditing purposes.28“If there is uncertainty after an election … a paperless system … doesn’t have any way to go back to other evidence to figure out what really happened.”Fourteen states lack voter-verified paper ballots in at least some jurisdictions.29 Put another way, roughly a quarter of the nation’s voting machines do not provide paper records for votes cast.30 In all, the Brennan Center for Justice estimates that during the 2016 general election, some 20 percent of registered Americans voted without leaving any voter-verified paper ballot or record.31 That number of voters—20 percent of the vote—is far more than what is necessary to swing an election. According to one postelection analysis by The Washington Post, a mere 0.09 percent of votes effectively decided the outcome of the 2016 presidential race.32States and counties using paperless touch-screen voting systems should replace them with paper ballots and optical scanners, or invest in electronic voting machines that produce voter-verified paper records. Recognizing the potential benefits of paper-ballot systems, officials in Denton County, Texas—the state’s ninth-largest county—recently announced that they would be trading out the county’s electronic voting machines for paper ballots after experiencing system malfunctions resulting in long lines and incorrect vote tallies during the 2016 general election.33 Even President Trump endorses the paper ballot system, telling reporters in November 2016, “There’s something really nice about the old paper-ballot system … You don’t worry about hacking.”34Paper-ballot optical scan systems have been shown to be more cost effective than electronic voting machines.35 In 2008, SAVE our Votes—a Maryland-based advocacy group for secure, accessible, and verifiable elections—conducted a cost analysis of Maryland’s decision to convert from a paper-based system to electronic voting machine touch screens in 2004.36 The study found that by 2008, the cost of conducting elections increased tenfold compared with only seven years prior. A number of counties that previously used optical scan systems saw their voting equipment costs skyrocket by an average of 179 percent per voter after switching to electronic touch screens.37 Maryland has since returned to a paper-ballot system.38 Voting systems that use electronic machines are costlier because they require more equipment. Each precinct, for example, requires several electronic voting machines to ensure that polling places can accommodate multiple voters at once. In contrast, paper-ballot voting systems require as few as one optical scanner and one ballot-marking station per precinct to assist voters with disabilities or language barriers.Additionally, many states allow voters to submit completed absentee ballots over the internet—via email, fax, or web portal—where there is no way for voters to confirm that the vote they cast is the same as that recorded by the county clerk’s office. While most states only allow online voting for military personnel and U.S. citizens living abroad, states such as Alaska allow online voting for all absentee voters.39 The Department of Homeland Security’s Cyber Security Division “does not recommend the adoption of online voting for elections at any level of government at this time,” due to concerns over voter confidentiality and the potential for vote manipulation by malicious actors.40 One solution going forward is to require that all absentee ballots be returned by mail.Much has been written about the dismal state of voting machines.41 In all, 42 states use voting machines that are more than a decade old, beyond the predicted 10-year lifespan of most models.42 As noted by cybersecurity expert and co-founder and chief development officer of the Open Source Election Technology Institute Gregory Miller, “In the time we’ve changed our cell phones five times, the same equipment is still running our elections.”43 Outdated voting machines pose serious security risks and are susceptible to system crashes and “vote flipping,” a rare occurrence whereby an individual’s vote for one candidate appears on the electronic interface as a vote for a different candidate.44 Voters in several states—including Michigan, Massachusetts, Utah, Virginia, and Illinois—reported experiencing problems with voting machines during the 2016 general election, citing machine malfunction and paper jamming, among other issues.45Old voting machines are prone to hacking, as many rely on outdated computer operating systems that do not accommodate modern-day cybersecurity protections.46 A number of voting machines in use today run on Windows XP, a Microsoft operating system first introduced in 2001 that has not been supported since 2014.47 As described by Wired Magazine’s Brian Barrett, a machine running on Windows XP “is a castle with no moat, portcullis raised, doors flung open, greeting the ravaging hoards with wine spritzers and jam.”48 On June 28, 2017, hackers attending the DEF CON hacking conference in Las Vegas infiltrated and remotely hacked voting machines—some operating on Windows XP—within just 90 minutes.49 Moreover, upkeep for outdated machines is becoming increasingly difficult, since many parts are no longer manufactured.50 In order to obtain the parts needed, some election administrators are turning to eBay, which comes with its own security risks.51Piling onto these concerns is the fact that weak chain-of-custody practices leave voting machines vulnerable to tampering. For example, an individual with only limited access can infect a machine with malicious malware and other viruses that can corrupt honest vote counts.52 Some electronic voting machines even include accessible ports that are an open invitation to hackers, who can plug in laptops or smartphones in order to add extra votes.53 Even with strong chain-of-custody practices, hackers can remotely infiltrate an electronic machine’s operating system, and without paper-ballot records, it is impossible to know whether a hack occurred or if votes were changed.54Aside from altering votes, glitches in the functionality of voting machines can sow public distrust in election outcomes and undermine the democratic process. During last year’s general election, reports surfaced of votes being “flipped” during early voting in North Carolina and Nevada.55 The NAACP sent a letter to North Carolina’s board of elections on October 24 after receiving complaints that machines in five of the state’s counties had flipped votes.56Although those who experienced problems were ultimately able to correct the error before casting their vote, two machines were removed from an early voting site in Mecklenburg County.57Given the documented problems, it is imperative that election administrators replace and upgrade all voting machines and components that still use outdated operating systems to new models that meet modern standards and up-to-date cybersecurity protections. In January, Michigan announced $40 million in state funding to upgrade its optical scanning machines—many of which are between 10 and 12 years old.58 The new machines, which the state hopes to start introducing as soon as August 2017, will not run on Windows XP.59 Local jurisdictions—in places such as Colorado, Florida, Texas, Wisconsin, and Virginia—are also meeting the challenge posed by outdated voting systems by investing in new voting machines.60 Ohio too is looking to update its machines, most of which were purchased between 2005 and 2006.61 Ohio has asked county boards of elections to provide the state with an estimated price tag for new voting systems, with the hope of having new machines in place by 2019 in anticipation for the 2020 presidential election.62The utility of paper ballots and voter-verified paper records is only useful for ensuring that the outcome of an election is correct if election administrators commit to carrying out robust postelection audits. As previously noted, all voting machines are vulnerable to hacking and even misprogramming, which can lead to reported election outcomes that do not match the tally of actual votes cast. For example, during a March 2012 municipal election in Palm Beach County, Florida, a software error in an optical scanning machine ended with votes being allocated to the wrong candidates, resulting in the misreporting of election results.63 The error was discovered through a postelection audit, and the results officially changed after a court-ordered public hand count of the votes.64Many jurisdictions are not doing enough to conduct audits on an adequate number of ballots to ensure election accuracy and detect manipulation of vote totals caused by failing machines or hackers. According to J. Alex Halderman, a computer science and engineering professor at the University of Michigan, only New Mexico and Colorado “conduct audits that are robust enough to reliably detect cyber attacks.”65 Having participated in numerous hacking experiments on voting machines, Halderman noted, “We need to consistently and routinely check that our election results are accurate, by inspecting enough of the paper ballots to tell whether the computer results are right.”66Only New Mexico and Colorado “conduct audits that are robust enough to reliably detect cyber attacks.”Given these facts, postelection audits—which are robust enough to create strong evidence that the outcome is accurate and to correct it if it is wrong—must be conducted after every election. Importantly, election officials must be given enough time between the closing of the polls and the certification of official election results to conduct a thorough audit. “Risk-limiting” audits increase the efficiency of the auditing process by testing only the number of ballots needed to determine the accuracy of election outcomes.67 Risk-limiting audits generally proceed by selecting an initial sample of ballots and interpreting them by hand, then determining whether the audit must expand.68 The number of ballots in the initial sample depends on various things, including the margin of victory in the contest.69 Elections with wide margins of victory require testing fewer ballots, while races with close margins of victory require more ballots to be tested because there is less room for error.70 Colorado is about to become the first state to regularly conduct risk-limiting audits after elections.71 As described by Dwight Shellman, the Colorado elections office’s county support manager, “If a voting system has been maliciously altered in some way, [this audit] should give the public great assurance that we are going to know that, and we will adjust the result accordingly.”72 Risk-limiting audits offer election administrators an effective and efficient way to test the accuracy of their elections without breaking the bank.America’s antiquated voter registration system threatens voter privacy and the ability of eligible voters to cast ballots that count. The Brennan Center for Justice estimates that 41 states and the District of Columbia use voter registration databases that are more than a decade old, leaving them susceptible to modern-day cyberattacks.73 If successfully breached, hackers could alter or delete voter registration information, which in turn could result in eligible Americans being turned away at the polls or prevented from casting ballots that count.74 Hackers could, for example, switch just a few letters in a registered voter’s name without detection. In states with strict voter ID laws, eligible Americans could be prevented from voting because of discrepancies between the name listed on an official poll book and the individual’s ID. In addition, by changing or deleting a registered individual’s political affiliation, hackers could prevent would-be voters from participating in partisan primaries. One of the major concerns associated with Trump’s new voter fraud commission is that it could establish a centralized national voter registration database, making it easy for hackers to penetrate and exploit voter registration information. As expressed by Kentucky Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes, “Coordinating a national voter registration system located in the White House is akin to handing a zip drive to Russia.”75The threat to voter registration systems is real. According to a DHS memo obtained by CNN, the department observed “Russian cyber actors attempting to access voter registration databases prior to the 2016 elections.”76 In August 2016, the Russian government targeted a company specializing in voter registration software, VR Systems, as part of a plan to “launch a voter registration-themed spear-phishing campaign targeting U.S. local government organizations,” according to National Security Agency documents obtained by The Intercept.77 On at least one occasion, hackers installed malware on the computer of an Arizona county election official, giving hackers access to login information that could be used to breach county voter registration databases.78 Twenty-one counties in North Carolina use software produced by VR Systems, including Durham County, which experienced the malfunction of laptops used to confirm voter registrations across multiple precincts last year, though local officials maintain that the problem was unrelated to Russian hacking.79 In order to ensure the accuracy and accessibility of voter registration lists during voting periods, states should establish paper-based contingency plans during early voting and on Election Day in case of system failures or hacks. For example, each local polling place should have paper copies of its voter registration lists on hand that can be consulted throughout the voting process.There are serious privacy implications associated with breaches to voter registration databases. Voter registration lists contain myriad personal information—including names, addresses, dates of birth, driver’s license numbers, political affiliations, and partial Social Security numbers—of eligible voters, which could be used by foreign or domestic foes in any number of ways.80 A report by South Carolina’s Election Commission revealed that there were nearly 150,000 attempts to penetrate the state’s voter registration database on Election Day last year.81 Moreover, Mother Jones has reported that 40 million voter registration records are currently being sold on the dark web.82 To ensure voter privacy, access to voter registration databases should be strictly limited to authorized personnel, while any system alterations should be tracked and preserved.83There were nearly 150,000 attempts to penetrate South Carolina’s voter registration database on Election Day last year.The widespread use of e-poll books is also a point of potential vulnerability.84 While e-poll books, which are currently or soon will be used by 34 states and the District of Columbia, have been shown to increase efficiency and reduce wait times at polling places, they are subject to tampering and malfunction, as is true with any electronic system.85 E-poll books should be tested prior to each election—as is currently required in at least nine states—and should only transmit information to other polling locations through secure channels, such as virtual private networks.86 All e-poll books should be able to print a paper record that includes every person who has already checked in to vote during early voting and on Election Day, in case of system failure. Of those states that use e-poll books and took part in a 2017 Pew Charitable Trusts survey, three—New Mexico, Colorado, and Indiana—currently lack backup paper rolls on Election Day.87 Three other states—California, Florida, and Illinois—lack paper backups in at least some jurisdictions.88 As with all election infrastructure, basic cybersecurity protections must be included as part of any e-poll book program. Additionally, written contingency protocol should be in place in the event of software error or suspicious discrepancies between e-poll books and paper voter lists.89Finally, lawmakers should implement common-sense voter registration upgrades by enacting automatic voter registration (AVR), as has already been done in eight states and the District of Columbia.90 AVR streamlines the election process for both voters and election officials, while making voter registration lists more accurate and secure.91 AVR should accompany adoption of voter registration upgrades that incorporate model cybersecurity defenses. Aside from AVR, a number of states have taken steps to update their voter registration databases, soliciting bids from vendors or introducing legislation that would allocate funds for the purposes of improving voter registration systems.92Experiments conducted by computer scientists on electronic voting machines have shown that they are easily hacked, can be reprogrammed to predetermine electoral outcomes and are susceptible to malicious vote-stealing software.93 Moreover, cybersecurity vulnerabilities in voter registration systems leave the privacy and voting rights of millions of voting-eligible Americans at risk. As reported by Politico in June 2017, a security failure in Georgia’s voter registration database, first discovered in 2016, left the voter registration records of up to 6.7 million people vulnerable to attack.94 After discovering the system’s security flaw and breaching the system, security researcher Logan Lamb alerted Kennesaw State University’s Center for Election Systems, which is responsible for testing the state’s touch screen voting machines and maintaining its software.95 After being informed of the vulnerability in August 2016, the election center’s executive director reportedly offered Lamb his gratitude, promising to get the server fixed.96 Seven months later, in March 2017, the system was still vulnerable to infiltration.97 The election center eventually brought in outside security experts and is said to have replaced its web server.98Minimum cybersecurity standards for election infrastructure are sorely lacking at both the state and the federal levels. The hacking of election machines and voter registration systems is a matter of national security. States and the federal government must respond by implementing, without delay, mandatory cybersecurity standards for all election infrastructure. 99Some state officials are already taking affirmative steps to establish minimum cybersecurity standards to protect state systems and databases. For example, many states already have some form of cybersecurity incident and disruption response plan in place to protect against and respond to cyberthreats.100 In addition, this past July, the National Governors Association, led by Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D), announced that 38 governors from across the country entered into “A Compact to Improve State Cybersecurity.”101 As part of the compact, states commit to “[d]eveloping a statewide cybersecurity strategy that emphasizes protecting the state’s IT networks, defending critical infrastructure, building the cybersecurity workforce and enhancing private partnerships.”102 States further agree to “[c]onducting a risk assessment to identify cyber vulnerabilities, cyber threats, potential consequences of cyberattacks and resources available to mitigate such threats and consequences,” among other things.103 These efforts are a strong start, but further steps are needed to include a plan of action carefully tailored to the unique traits of voting infrastructure.States should conduct mandatory pre-election tests on all voting machines to ensure that they are in good working order before a single vote is cast. Most states already have laws in place requiring state officials to test voting machines and equipment in the weeks and months leading up to an election, though their scope varies depending on the jurisdiction.104 Some states require that all voting machines be tested, while others permit the testing of a small sampling of machines.105 And while pre-election testing may be required, it is not always carried out in practice. Admittedly, pre-election testing is not foolproof and can be manipulated, particularly by sophisticated actors.106 That being said, pre-election testing remains an important step that states can take to mitigate machine-related problems on Election Day and protect the reliability of election outcomes.Testing should be conducted on all election machines and equipment, including e-poll books, on multiple occasions prior to the start of early voting and Election Day. Testing should be carried out with appropriate public notice and in a public forum in an effort to increase transparency and public confidence in the electoral process. Critically, testing must be completed with enough time to allow for effective remediation. Any abnormalities should be reported immediately to officials overseeing election administration and security, and they should be shared between states, localities, and federal agencies to alert other election administrators to potential threats.Additionally, in order to understand the full extent of election-related risk, vulnerability analysis should be carried out continuously on all election machines and voter registration databases.107 In the words of Sen. Ron Wyden (D-OR), “We obviously need to know about vulnerabilities, so that we can find solutions.”108 Vulnerability analysis of election infrastructure should be mandated by state and federal law and should include regular system penetration testing and vulnerability scans. Once conducted, states will be better positioned to assess where government resources should be allocated and plan for preventative measures and strategies.Vulnerability analysis should be carried out by qualified, impartial professionals, rather than election equipment vendors or election administrators, who may have an interest in minimizing shortcomings in election machines and downplaying election vulnerabilities. States too can conduct regular vulnerability assessments on their election infrastructure. Some states—including Maryland and Washington—have employed their Air National Guard to conduct cybersecurity testing on public networks.109 In 2016, the Ohio National Guard took part in defending the state’s elections systems by running penetration tests to detect vulnerabilities and searching for evidence of malicious activity.110 Other states, including Ohio and Virginia, have reportedly carried out security assessments on their voter registration databases, costing an estimated $25,000 and $40,000, respectively—a fraction of their annual budgets.111 Regular, automated scans should be conducted on voter registration databases to detect suspicious activity as soon as it occurs. Suspicious findings should be reported immediately to federal agencies and to other state and local election officials around the country. The federal government could incentivize such analysis via grant programs, including those that exist at DHS, and Congress should explore whether such programs are sufficiently flexible and resourced to support these efforts.To gain an overall appreciation of the risk to our election systems, the vulnerability assessments discussed above must be matched with information sharing that includes comprehensive threat assessments. While the federal government is well-versed in providing this assistance generally, the urgent need to protect our democratic processes should be a catalyst for further reform, as Russia’s interference in the 2016 election demonstrated clear stovepiping within the intelligence community (IC), and between the IC and state and local governments. For example, information-sharing organizations such as the state-run intelligence fusion centers and the Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) have enjoyed some success, whether in the counterterrorism or the cybersecurity context.112 But to counter foreign threats to election systems, the scope of IC support for such organizations should be expanded, while public-private sector coordination as related to critical infrastructure and cybersecurity should be appropriately leveraged.113More broadly, the U.S. government should undertake reform to ensure that the whole of the intelligence community is supporting federal and state efforts to enhance election security. For example, Congress should urge the IC to prioritize collection and dissemination of information pertaining not just to cyberthreats but also to specific threats to elections and election systems, ideally through the National Intelligence Priorities Framework—which sets priorities for the entire IC—with the goal of making this intelligence shareable with state and local officials, via the FBI or DHS, in both classified and unclassified formats.114 Another step would be for the IC to conduct a comprehensive National Intelligence Estimate concerning threats to elections and make it unclassified.115 Finally, the newly formed Cyber Threat Intelligence Integration Center should assume a lead role in integrating various intelligence streams to give stakeholders—including policymakers, Congress, and state and local officials—a comprehensive and continuous snapshot of cyber-related election threats, be they cyberintrusions specifically or related campaigns such as influence operations.116The U.S. intelligence community is best equipped to carry out threat assessments, as it has the personnel and resources necessary to thoroughly probe and analyze complex election databases, machines, and cyber vulnerabilities.117 In carrying out these assessments, federal officers must work closely with state officials who are more familiar with the intricacies of their unique systems. State officials who have appropriate security clearances should also be provided with regular classified briefings on cybersecurity threats and system vulnerabilities.118 All federal agencies responsible for conducting election infrastructure threat assessments should be required to submit biannual reports—classified and unclassified—to Congress on their findings, as a means of educating lawmakers and the public on threats and making recommendations for best practices.119 In addition, Congress should receive swift notification of any intelligence concluding that there have been cyberattacks or intrusions on our election system, or evidence that a foreign adversary has sought to interfere in our democracy.On January 6, 2017, the Department of Homeland Security designated election systems as “critical infrastructure,” defined as “systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United States that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any combination of those matters.”120 The designation places election systems on the same level of importance as our country’s financial services industry and transportation systems, and it is an important first step in protecting the future of America’s elections and system of self-government.121A “critical infrastructure” designation comes with benefits for election administrators, including priority status for requests submitted to DHS, domestic and international cybersecurity protections provided by federal agencies, and access to the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MS-ISAC).122 MS-ISAC facilitates and provides avenues for information sharing between states and DHS, furthering the ability of states to prevent and respond to cyberattacks.123 According to DHS, the department is already holding biweekly teleconferences with “all relevant election officials,” which is a promising start.124 However, DHS should be held accountable for specifying comprehensive, specific steps it will undertake to support this designation.125 This may include determining whether MS-ISAC support is sufficient to meet the task or whether a more focused effort, such as the establishment of an election-focused information sharing hub, should take place.The ability to share information and synchronize responses in real time is essential to protecting U.S. election security and resilience.126 States and federal officials must work together, combining their expertise on cybersecurity threats and insight on the unique qualities of localized election infrastructure, to better assess and deter attempts at electoral disruption. Federal bodies and state officials are already coming together to address the issue. In July 2017, the Election Assistance Commission (EAC) in coordination with DHS, hosted a two-day meeting with election administrators and stakeholders from around the country to address threats to election infrastructure.127 According to the EAC, the meeting involved conversations over the designation of elections as “critical infrastructure” and next steps for information sharing between interested parties.128Coordinated partnership between levels of government—especially as related to voting and elections—has not always been conducted in the most efficient or effective manner. For example, some state officials voiced frustration after first learning that their state may have been one of those targeted by Russian operatives during the 2016 elections through testimony given recently by DHS officials before Congress.129 There is room for improvement in identifying, promoting, and exercising channels for communicating key information. The See Something, Say Something campaign or the Nationwide Suspicious Activity Reporting Initiative may offer guidance to set up public education campaigns in the context of election security.130 The private sector also has a role to play. Election vendors, for example, should be required to provide notice to states in the event that their systems are hacked, in order to prevent potential problems from arising during elections.The role of federal agencies in protecting election security does not constitute a federal takeover of election administration. As aptly described by Sen. King of Maine, “[N]obody’s talking about a federal takeover of local election systems or the federal rules. What we’re talking about is technical assistance in information and perhaps some funding, at some point.”131 By designating election systems as critical infrastructure, coordination between stakeholders has the potential to be improved, but it will depend on sustained pressure and engagement by concerned stakeholders.Updating outdated election infrastructure, conducting mandatory audits, and putting in place minimum cybersecurity standards and testing is essential and requires resources. Some estimates suggest the nationwide cost of updating outdated voting machines to be upward of $1 billion, while the cost of replacing the country’s paperless machines is between $130 million and $400 million.132 At the same time, the national cost of conducting threat assessments for voter registration databases is estimated to be between $1 million and $5 million annually, with nationwide risk-limiting audits for federal elections costing less than $20 million per year, according to some evaluations.133 According to one study conducted by the Brennan Center for Justice, of the 274 election officials surveyed in 28 states, more than half said that they will need new voting machines by 2020.134 Unfortunately, 80 percent of those officials said they “did not have all the necessary funds.”135 State and local election administrators cannot, and should not, be expected to independently foot the bill on these protective measures. It is the responsibility of Congress to defend American interests and ensure that our elections, which are central to a functioning democracy, are free, fair, and secure. The federal government and Congress have a duty to allocate funding and assist in the implementation of measures to guard against disruptions in future elections, at the very least in federal elections.This would not be the first time that Congress provided funds to upgrade election infrastructure. In the 2000 presidential election, antiquated punch-card voting machines resulted in thousands of lost and uncounted votes. In response, Congress passed the Help America Vote Act of 2002, providing $3 billion to help states upgrade to high-tech voting machines.136 Congress should once again recognize the current crisis affecting U.S. elections—this time with the added threat of foreign adversaries actively seeking to infiltrate election databases and sway election outcomes.137 It is encouraging that funding for the EAC was also recently restored, after earlier attempts to defund the agency.138 The EAC is responsible for helping ensure the proper functioning and security of election machines, and as noted by Rep. Steny H. Hoyer (D-MD), “provides one of our strongest built-in protections against cyberattacks on our voting infrastructure.”139The EAC “provides one of our strongest built-in protections against cyberattacks on our voting infrastructure.”Congress must act now to pass legislation that, contingent upon the adoption of best practices, provides state and localities the necessary funding to:In addition to offsetting the cost burdens on state, county, and municipal election administrators—many of whom simply cannot afford to update and secure election machines and databases—federal funding can stem inequity resulting from uneven municipal operating budgets. When state and local jurisdictions are held solely responsible for purchasing new voting machines or providing other updates to their election systems, it is often the case that richer, majority white communities receive newer, more reliable machines and upgraded security measures.141 Conversely, poorer communities and communities of color are left with inadequate machines and cyber protections that can lead to a higher likelihood that they may not be able to exercise their right to vote as a result of malfunctioning and easily hacked voting machines or election databases.142 The allocation of federal funds can therefore counterbalance the unequal distribution of state and local resources to ensure that funding goes where it is most needed and to help guarantee that all Americans who are eligible to vote are able to participate in the electoral process using secure and reliable systems.As it currently exists, America’s election infrastructure is dangerously insecure and susceptible to hacking, machine malfunctioning, and Election Day disruption. In 2016, Russia exhibited both the skill and determination to cause problems and sow distrust in U.S. electoral processes and outcomes. It is safe to assume that Russia is right now strategizing its next plan of attack, honing its abilities to infiltrate sensitive state and federal election machines and databases without detection and to maximum effect. As Sen. Burr warned, “This adversary is determined. They’re aggressive and they’re getting more sophisticated by the day.”143 Failure to put in place measures and provide funding to protect election infrastructure is the height of political negligence. It is critical that we begin building our defenses to protect against election intrusions before it is too late. The future of our democracy depends on immediate action by government officials and election administrators at all levels to update and safeguard America’s election systems and processes.Danielle Root is the voting rights manager for Democracy and Government at the Center for American Progress. Liz Kennedy is the director of Democracy and Government Reform at the Center.The authors would like to thank Marian Schneider, Moira Whelan, Susannah Goodman, and Patrick Barry for their contributions to this issue brief.
WASHINGTON (AP) — Exactly seven months before the 2016 presidential election, Russian government hackers made it onto a Democratic committee's network.One of their carefully crafted fraudulent emails had hit pay dirt, enticing an employee to click a link and enter her password.That breach of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee was the first significant step in gaining access to the Democratic National Committee network.To steal politically sensitive information, prosecutors say, the hackers exploited some of the United States' own computer infrastructure against it, using servers they leased in Arizona and Illinois. The details were included in an indictment released Friday by special counsel Robert Mueller, who accused the GRU, Russia's military intelligence agency, of taking part in a wide-ranging conspiracy to interfere in the 2016 presidential election. The companies operating the servers were not identified in the court papers.The Russians are accused of exploiting their access to inexpensive, powerful servers worldwide — conveniently available for rental — that can be used to commit crimes with impunity. Reaching across oceans and into networks without borders can obfuscate their origins.The indictment painstakingly reconstructs the hackers' movements using web servers and a complex bitcoin financing operation.Two Russian hacking units were charged with tasks, including the creation and management of a hacking tool called "X-agent" that was implanted onto computers. The software allowed them to monitor activity on computers by individuals, steal passwords and maintain access to hacked networks. It captured each keystroke on infected computers and took screenshots of activity displayed on computer screens, including an employee viewing the DCCC's online banking information.From April to June 2016, the hackers installed updated versions of their software on at least 10 Democratic computers. The software transmitted information from the infected computers to a GRU-leased server in Arizona, the indictment said. The hackers also created an overseas computer to act as a "middle server" to obscure the connection between the DCCC and the hackers' Arizona-based server.Once hackers gained access to the DCCC network, it searched one computer for terms that included "hillary," ''cruz," and "trump" and copied select folders, including "Benghazi Investigations."In emails, the hackers embedded a link that purported to be a spreadsheet of Clinton's favorability ratings, but instead it directed the computers to send its data to a GRU-created website.Meanwhile, around the same time, the hackers broke into 33 DNC computers and installed their software on their network. Captured keystrokes and screenshots from the DCCC and DNC computers, including an employee viewing the DCCC's banking information, were sent back to the Arizona server.The Russian hackers used other software they developed called X-Tunnel to move stolen documents through encrypted channels to another computer the GRU leased in Illinois.Despite the use of U.S.-based servers, such vendors typically aren't legally liable for criminal activities unless it can be proved in federal court that the operator was party to the criminal activity.A 1996 federal statute protects internet vendors from being held liable for how customers use their service, and except for a few exceptions, provides immunity to the providers. The law is considered a key part of the legal infrastructure of the internet, preventing providers from being saddled with the behemoth task of monitoring activity on their servers."The fact that someone provided equipment and or connectivity that was used to engage in data theft is not going to be attributed to the vendor in that circumstance," Eric Goldman, a professor of law and co-director of the High Tech Law Institute at Santa Clara University School of Law, said. A notable exception, however, is if federal prosecutors are bringing a criminal charge for violations of a federal criminal law.In that case, "we're going to require a high level of knowledge of their activity or intent," Goldman said.When the DNC and DCCC became aware they had been hacked, they hired a cybersecurity firm, Crowdstrike, to determine the extent of the intrusions. Crowdstrike, referred to as "Company 1" in the indictment, took steps to kick the hackers off the networks around June 2016. But for months the Russians eluded their investigators and a version of the malware remained on the network through October — programed to communicate back to a GRU-registered internet address."We do not have any information to suggest that it successfully communicated," said Adrienne Watson, the DNC's deputy communications director.As the company worked to kick them off, GRU officials allegedly searched online for information on Company 1 and what it had reported about its use of X-Agent malware and tried to delete their traces on the DCCC network by using commercial software known as CCleaner. Though Crowdstrike disabled X-agent on the DCCC network, the hackers spent seven hours unsuccessfully trying to connect to their malware and tried using previously stolen credentials to access the network on June 20, 2016.The indictment also shows the reliance of Russian government hackers on American technology companies such as Twitter, to spread its stolen documents.The hackers also accessed DNC data in September 2016 by breaking into DNC computers hosted on the Amazon Web Services' cloud. The hackers used Amazon Web Services' backup feature to create "snapshots" that they moved onto their own Amazon cloud accounts. Amazon also provides cloud computing services for various government agencies, including the Central Intelligence Agency.___Follow Tami Abdollah at https://twitter.com/latams
Log in using your social network accountLog in directly with The IndependentTry Independent Minds free for 14 daysHi {{fullName}}'If Russia or China or any of those country gets those emails...I’d love to see them'Russian hackers allegedly made their first attempt to hack the emails of Hillary Clinton and her campaign staff on the same day Donald Trump publicly asked them to.Documents released by Special Counsel Robert Mueller in connection with the indictment of 12 Russian intelligence officers, claim the hackers targeted a domain used by Ms Clinton’s personal office “on or about July 27 2016”.The indictment alleges the hackers also on that day, targeted 76 email accounts belonging to the Clinton campaign by means of so-called spear phishing – a technique used to try and access specific addresses. That attack came during the middle of the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia, which had already been rocked by the publication by Wikileaks of previously hacked emails that revealed members of the supposedly neutral Democratic National Committee were biased in favour of Ms Clinton and had worked to undermine her primary rival, Bernie Sanders. Amid the controversy, which resulted in the resignation of DNC chairwoman, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Mr Trump held a press conference in Florida where he was campaigning.At the press conference, Mr Trump sought to draw attention to the controversy about Ms Clinton’s improper use of a private email server while serving as secretary of state, something that was investigated by the FBI but ultimately resulted in no criminal charges.A year earlier, Ms Clinton had given the State Department around 30,000 work-related emails from the private server she used. She said another 33,000 were deleted because they were personal in nature – something Mr Trump repeatedly seized on.Mr Trump told reporters in at his Doral Golf Centre in Miami, he hoped the Russian hackers, said to have been behind the theft of the emails from the DNC which had embarrassed the Democrats, searched for Ms Clinton’s deleted emails.“If they hacked, they probably have her 33,000 emails. I hope they do,” he said. “They probably have her 33,000 emails that she lost and deleted. You’d see some beauties, so we’ll see.”He added: “Russia, if you are listening. I hope you are able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing. I think you will probably be rewarded mightily by the press.”Asked if he was concerned that he was apparently encouraging Russia to spy on an American political party, he added: “It gives me no pause. If Russia or China or any of those country gets those emails, I’ve got to be honest with you, I’d love to see them.”At the time, Ms Clinton’s campaign hit back angrily. “This has to be the first time that a major presidential candidate has actively encouraged a foreign power to conduct espionage against his political opponent,” it said. “That’s not hyperbole. Those are just the facts. This has gone from being a matter of curiosity and a matter of politics to being a national security issue.”Some of those in the Trump campaign suggested the candidate was merely joking.The former reality TV star doubled down on his comments on Twitter, saying: “If Russia or any other country or person has Hillary Clinton’s 33,000 illegally deleted emails, perhaps they should share them with the FBI!”He later claimed he was being sarcastic, telling Fox News: “Of course I was being sarcastic. And frankly, they don’t even know if it’s Russia, if it’s China, if it’s someone else. Who knows who it is.”Mr Mueller’s indictment does not mention Mr Trump’s comments. Rod Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general and the Justice Department official overseeing Mr Mueller’s probe, said officials were not alleging in the indictment that American citizens had knowingly been in contact with the Russians about the hacking. “The conspirators corresponded with several Americans during the course of the conspiracy through the internet,” Mr Rosenstein said.“There’s no allegation in this indictment that the Americans knew they were corresponding with Russian intelligence officers.”The indictment claims the Russian hackers were officers Russia’s military intelligence agency, the GRU.“In addition to releasing documents directly to the public, the defendants transferred stolen documents to another organisation, not named in the indictment, and discussed timing the release of the documents in an attempt to enhance the impact on the election,” said Mr Rosenstein.It is assumed the organisation indictment is referring to is WikiLeaks. Reuters said WikiLeaks, which was not indicted, did not immediately respond to requests for comment.You can find our Community Guidelines in full here.You can find our Community Guidelines in full here.Enter your email to follow new comments on this article.Are you sure you want to submit this vote?Are you sure you want to mark this comment as inappropriate?Want to discuss real-world problems, be involved in the most engaging discussions and hear from the journalists? Try Independent Minds free for 14 days. Are you sure you want to mark this comment as inappropriate?Are you sure you want to delete this comment?Anyone can post in open comments. Please continue to respect all commenters and create constructive debates.Want to discuss real-world problems, be involved in the most engaging discussions and hear from the journalists? Try Independent Minds free for 14 days. Independent Minds Comments can be posted by members of our membership scheme, Independent Minds.
          It allows our most engaged readers to debate the big issues, share their own experiences, discuss
          real-world solutions, and more. Our journalists will try to respond by joining the threads when
          they can to create a true meeting of independent minds. The most insightful comments on all subjects
          will be published daily in dedicated articles. You can also choose to be emailed when someone replies
          to your comment.
        
          The existing Open Comments threads will continue to exist for those who do not subscribe to
          Independent Minds. Due to the sheer scale of this comment community, we are not able to give each post
          the same level of attention, but we have preserved this area in the interests of open debate. Please
          continue to respect all commenters and create constructive debates.
        

Cyberwarfare / Nation-state attacks
                                                    ,
                                                            Fraud Management & Cybercrime
The U.S. Justice Department's indictment of 12 Russian intelligence officers for attempting to interfere in the 2016 U.S. presidential election reveals new details about attackers' tactics - and failures.See Also: Live Webinar | Don't Break the Bank: Achieve Compliance Quickly and at ScaleThe indictment, which came via Special Counsel Robert Mueller's ongoing investigation into that interference, describes new details about who was hacked and how, including operational security - OPSEC - successes and failures, including the use of cryptocurrencies to help mask intelligence agencies' activities.Here are 10 takeaways from the indictment:Thomas Rid, professor of strategic studies at Johns Hopkins University, calls the move by the FBI and Justice Department to indict the Russian intelligence agents as being "truly extraordinary," in that it calls out not only two GRU units by name - 26165 and 74455 - but also lists their commanding officers and team members and reveals operational details, even including defendants' online searches for the PowerShell commands they needed to hack into the DNC's Microsoft Exchange Server."I can't think of a historical precedent that goes into similar detail in response to active measures," Rid says via Twitter.Many details mentioned in the indictment were already know. Some weren't. Para 35 nicely ties together the larger operations, and shows how hard it is to run a large, complex operation with bulletproof OPSEC. The details underlined in red have not been revealed before. pic.twitter.com/VjpcuPpPtXBut this isn't the first time that the Justice Department has singled out intelligence agency operatives or individuals acting as state-sponsored hackers on criminal hacking charges. At least four other such cases have already been seen, beginning with the Justice Department in 2014 indicting five Chinese army officers for hacking American corporate computers to steal intellectual property.What is unusual about this new indictment, however, is that President Donald Trump doesn't appear to be backing the FBI, Justice Department or intelligence community's findings.
After a meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday in Helsinki, Trump called the Mueller probe "ridiculous" and "a disaster for our country" and appeared to prioritize Putin's denials over U.S. law enforcement and intelligence agencies' conclusions. "President Putin was extremely strong and powerful in his denial today," Trump said.
Trump also repeatedly asked about the Democratic National Committee's email server and Hillary Clinton's missing emails. 
Putin, meanwhile, claimed to not know about the "full extent" of the alleged election interference. "I don't know the full extent of the situation," he said via a translator at the press conference. "President Trump mentioned this issue. I will look into it."
2. Attackers Mixed Phishing, Malware
Twelve individuals have been named in the new indictment. "These GRU officers, in their official capacities, engaged in a sustained effort to hack into the computer networks of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, the Democratic National Committee and the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton, and released that information on the internet under the names 'DCLeaks' and 'Guccifer 2.0' and through another entity," according to the Justice Department.
That other entity is only named in the indictment as "Organization 1." But the timing of its document releases aligns with when WikiLeaks began releasing the stolen DNC and DCCC information. According to the indictment, Organization 1 "released over 20,000 emails and other documents stolen from the DNC network by the conspirators," just days before the Democratic National Convention. "The latest-in-time email released through Organization 1 was dated on or about May 25, 2016, approximately the same day the conspirators hacked the DNC Microsoft Exchange Server."
Leaks aside, the initial compromises, however, didn't appear to employ very sophisticated tactics or technology. "The defendants used two techniques to steal information. First, they used a scam known as 'spear phishing,' which involves sending misleading email messages and tricking users into disclosing their passwords and security information," Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein said in a Friday press conference. "Second, the defendants hacked into computer networks and installed malicious software that allowed them to spy on users and capture keystrokes, take screenshots and exfiltrate, or remove, data from those computers."
The malware, known as X-Agent, was installed on at least 13 DNC and DCCC systems, according to the indictment.
3. X-Agent Malware Tough to Stamp Out
The indictment also reveals that the DNC and DCCC in May 2016 hired CrowdStrike to help remediate the intrusions - which the FBI also began investigating - but that at least one piece of X-Agent Linux malware planted by attackers persisted until October 2016.
But the DNC says it doesn't believe that the Linux malware agent posed a threat after CrowdStrike remediated the intrusion. "This Linux based version of X-Agent malware was a remnant of the original hack and had been quarantined during the remediation process in June 2016,"  Adrienne Watson, the DNC's deputy communications director, told Politico in a statement. "While programmed to communicate with a GRU-registered domain, we do not have any information to suggest that it successfully communicated, exfiltrated data, corrupted our newly built systems or breached our voter file following the remediation process."
In September 2016, meanwhile, the attackers allegedly also "successfully gained access to DNC computers hosted on a third-party cloud computing service" that "contained test applications related to the DNC's analytics," the indictment says. The attackers allegedly created backups of this data, then transferred them to their own account, allowing them to obtain the actual data.
4. DCCC Network Compromise Led to DNC Hack
The indictment says the Russian agents successfully infected a DCCC employee's PC with X-Agent malware, which allowed them to log her keystrokes and capture screenshots. This victim appeared to be "patient zero" in the hacking campaign. The agents then "hacked into the DNC network from the DCCC network using stolen credentials" and by June 2016 had accessed about 33 different DNC computers, onto which they deployed the same X-Agent malware (see DNC Breach More Severe Than First Believed).
"To enable them to steal a large number of documents at once without detection, the conspirators used a publicly available tool to gather and compress multiple documents on the DCCC and DNC networks," according to the indictment. "The conspirators then used other GRU malware, known as 'X-Tunnel,' to move the stolen documents outside the DCCC and DNC networks through encrypted channels."
5. Spies Pay With Cryptocurrency
The Russian intelligence agents allegedly used bitcoins to help disguise their activities.
"Although the conspirators caused transactions to be conducted in a variety of currencies, including U.S. dollars, they principally used bitcoin when purchasing servers, registering domains and otherwise making payments in furtherance of hacking activity," according to the indictment.
The indictment alleges that the defendants, in part, generated their own bitcoins via mining - solving computational challenges that build out the public ledger of transactions, called the blockchain, for which miners can receive bitcoins as a reward.

"They principally used bitcoin when purchasing servers, registering domains, and otherwise making payments in furtherance of hacking activity."

The indictment says other bitcoins were acquired in ways designed to obscure their origin, which included "purchasing bitcoin through peer-to-peer exchanges, moving funds through other digital currencies and using pre-paid cards." The defendants also allegedly used  bitcoin tumbling services to disguise their activities (see Criminals Hide 'Billions' in Cryptocurrency, Europol Warns).
The defendants, the indictment alleges, used bitcoins "to pay a Romanian company to register the domain dcleaks.com through a payment processing company located in the United States," as well as to lease a server in Malaysia that hosted the DCLeaks.com website and which was used to target the DCCC and DNC networks via spear phishing attacks. The same bitcoin pool was also used to pay for a virtual private network account that was used to log into the Guccifer 2.0 Twitter account, authorities say (see Analysis: VPN Fail Reveals 'Guccifer 2.0' is 'Fancy Bear').
"This is the first clear example in court documents of cryptocurrency being used to purchase capabilities that could be leveraged in attacks on national security," Jonathan Levin, a co-founder of Chainalysis, a firm that helps governments track cryptocurrency payments, tells the New York Times.
6. Active Measures Have Been Industrialized
The indictment reveals that Russia's use of "active measures" - aka dezinformatsiya or disinformation, pioneered in the Soviet era - remains alive and well, Rid says.
"Active measures are semi-covert or covert intelligence operations to shape an adversary's political decisions," Rid told the Senate Intelligence Committee in March 2017 testimony. "Almost always active measures conceal or falsify the source - intelligence operators try to hide behind anonymity, or behind false flags. Active measures may also spread forged, or partly forged, content."
Rid says active measures work best when designed to exploit preexisting weaknesses in society. "The more polarized a society, the more vulnerable it is," he said. "America in 2016 was highly polarized, with myriad cracks and fissures to drive wedges into - not old wedges, but improved high-tech wedges that allowed Moscow's operators to attack their target faster, more reactively and at far larger scale than ever before."
7. Doxing Remains a Favored Attack Tactic
One active measures tactic involves doxing - stealing and releasing information on an individual or organization. And the 11-count criminal indictment against the 12 Russian intelligence agents accuses them of having participated in GRU cyber operations "that involved the staged release of stolen documents for the purpose of interfering with the 2016 president election."

"Active measures are semi-covert or covert intelligence operations to shape an adversary's political decisions." 
 
— Thomas Rid

After a meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday in Helsinki, Trump called the Mueller probe "ridiculous" and "a disaster for our country" and appeared to prioritize Putin's denials over U.S. law enforcement and intelligence agencies' conclusions. "President Putin was extremely strong and powerful in his denial today," Trump said.
Trump also repeatedly asked about the Democratic National Committee's email server and Hillary Clinton's missing emails. 
Putin, meanwhile, claimed to not know about the "full extent" of the alleged election interference. "I don't know the full extent of the situation," he said via a translator at the press conference. "President Trump mentioned this issue. I will look into it."
2. Attackers Mixed Phishing, Malware
Twelve individuals have been named in the new indictment. "These GRU officers, in their official capacities, engaged in a sustained effort to hack into the computer networks of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, the Democratic National Committee and the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton, and released that information on the internet under the names 'DCLeaks' and 'Guccifer 2.0' and through another entity," according to the Justice Department.
That other entity is only named in the indictment as "Organization 1." But the timing of its document releases aligns with when WikiLeaks began releasing the stolen DNC and DCCC information. According to the indictment, Organization 1 "released over 20,000 emails and other documents stolen from the DNC network by the conspirators," just days before the Democratic National Convention. "The latest-in-time email released through Organization 1 was dated on or about May 25, 2016, approximately the same day the conspirators hacked the DNC Microsoft Exchange Server."
Leaks aside, the initial compromises, however, didn't appear to employ very sophisticated tactics or technology. "The defendants used two techniques to steal information. First, they used a scam known as 'spear phishing,' which involves sending misleading email messages and tricking users into disclosing their passwords and security information," Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein said in a Friday press conference. "Second, the defendants hacked into computer networks and installed malicious software that allowed them to spy on users and capture keystrokes, take screenshots and exfiltrate, or remove, data from those computers."
The malware, known as X-Agent, was installed on at least 13 DNC and DCCC systems, according to the indictment.
3. X-Agent Malware Tough to Stamp Out
The indictment also reveals that the DNC and DCCC in May 2016 hired CrowdStrike to help remediate the intrusions - which the FBI also began investigating - but that at least one piece of X-Agent Linux malware planted by attackers persisted until October 2016.
But the DNC says it doesn't believe that the Linux malware agent posed a threat after CrowdStrike remediated the intrusion. "This Linux based version of X-Agent malware was a remnant of the original hack and had been quarantined during the remediation process in June 2016,"  Adrienne Watson, the DNC's deputy communications director, told Politico in a statement. "While programmed to communicate with a GRU-registered domain, we do not have any information to suggest that it successfully communicated, exfiltrated data, corrupted our newly built systems or breached our voter file following the remediation process."
In September 2016, meanwhile, the attackers allegedly also "successfully gained access to DNC computers hosted on a third-party cloud computing service" that "contained test applications related to the DNC's analytics," the indictment says. The attackers allegedly created backups of this data, then transferred them to their own account, allowing them to obtain the actual data.
4. DCCC Network Compromise Led to DNC Hack
The indictment says the Russian agents successfully infected a DCCC employee's PC with X-Agent malware, which allowed them to log her keystrokes and capture screenshots. This victim appeared to be "patient zero" in the hacking campaign. The agents then "hacked into the DNC network from the DCCC network using stolen credentials" and by June 2016 had accessed about 33 different DNC computers, onto which they deployed the same X-Agent malware (see DNC Breach More Severe Than First Believed).
"To enable them to steal a large number of documents at once without detection, the conspirators used a publicly available tool to gather and compress multiple documents on the DCCC and DNC networks," according to the indictment. "The conspirators then used other GRU malware, known as 'X-Tunnel,' to move the stolen documents outside the DCCC and DNC networks through encrypted channels."
5. Spies Pay With Cryptocurrency
The Russian intelligence agents allegedly used bitcoins to help disguise their activities.
"Although the conspirators caused transactions to be conducted in a variety of currencies, including U.S. dollars, they principally used bitcoin when purchasing servers, registering domains and otherwise making payments in furtherance of hacking activity," according to the indictment.
The indictment alleges that the defendants, in part, generated their own bitcoins via mining - solving computational challenges that build out the public ledger of transactions, called the blockchain, for which miners can receive bitcoins as a reward.

"They principally used bitcoin when purchasing servers, registering domains, and otherwise making payments in furtherance of hacking activity."

The indictment says other bitcoins were acquired in ways designed to obscure their origin, which included "purchasing bitcoin through peer-to-peer exchanges, moving funds through other digital currencies and using pre-paid cards." The defendants also allegedly used  bitcoin tumbling services to disguise their activities (see Criminals Hide 'Billions' in Cryptocurrency, Europol Warns).
The defendants, the indictment alleges, used bitcoins "to pay a Romanian company to register the domain dcleaks.com through a payment processing company located in the United States," as well as to lease a server in Malaysia that hosted the DCLeaks.com website and which was used to target the DCCC and DNC networks via spear phishing attacks. The same bitcoin pool was also used to pay for a virtual private network account that was used to log into the Guccifer 2.0 Twitter account, authorities say (see Analysis: VPN Fail Reveals 'Guccifer 2.0' is 'Fancy Bear').
"This is the first clear example in court documents of cryptocurrency being used to purchase capabilities that could be leveraged in attacks on national security," Jonathan Levin, a co-founder of Chainalysis, a firm that helps governments track cryptocurrency payments, tells the New York Times.
6. Active Measures Have Been Industrialized
The indictment reveals that Russia's use of "active measures" - aka dezinformatsiya or disinformation, pioneered in the Soviet era - remains alive and well, Rid says.
"Active measures are semi-covert or covert intelligence operations to shape an adversary's political decisions," Rid told the Senate Intelligence Committee in March 2017 testimony. "Almost always active measures conceal or falsify the source - intelligence operators try to hide behind anonymity, or behind false flags. Active measures may also spread forged, or partly forged, content."
Rid says active measures work best when designed to exploit preexisting weaknesses in society. "The more polarized a society, the more vulnerable it is," he said. "America in 2016 was highly polarized, with myriad cracks and fissures to drive wedges into - not old wedges, but improved high-tech wedges that allowed Moscow's operators to attack their target faster, more reactively and at far larger scale than ever before."
7. Doxing Remains a Favored Attack Tactic
One active measures tactic involves doxing - stealing and releasing information on an individual or organization. And the 11-count criminal indictment against the 12 Russian intelligence agents accuses them of having participated in GRU cyber operations "that involved the staged release of stolen documents for the purpose of interfering with the 2016 president election."

"Active measures are semi-covert or covert intelligence operations to shape an adversary's political decisions." 
 
— Thomas Rid
After a meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday in Helsinki, Trump called the Mueller probe "ridiculous" and "a disaster for our country" and appeared to prioritize Putin's denials over U.S. law enforcement and intelligence agencies' conclusions. "President Putin was extremely strong and powerful in his denial today," Trump said.
Trump also repeatedly asked about the Democratic National Committee's email server and Hillary Clinton's missing emails. 
Putin, meanwhile, claimed to not know about the "full extent" of the alleged election interference. "I don't know the full extent of the situation," he said via a translator at the press conference. "President Trump mentioned this issue. I will look into it."
2. Attackers Mixed Phishing, Malware
Twelve individuals have been named in the new indictment. "These GRU officers, in their official capacities, engaged in a sustained effort to hack into the computer networks of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, the Democratic National Committee and the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton, and released that information on the internet under the names 'DCLeaks' and 'Guccifer 2.0' and through another entity," according to the Justice Department.
That other entity is only named in the indictment as "Organization 1." But the timing of its document releases aligns with when WikiLeaks began releasing the stolen DNC and DCCC information. According to the indictment, Organization 1 "released over 20,000 emails and other documents stolen from the DNC network by the conspirators," just days before the Democratic National Convention. "The latest-in-time email released through Organization 1 was dated on or about May 25, 2016, approximately the same day the conspirators hacked the DNC Microsoft Exchange Server."
Leaks aside, the initial compromises, however, didn't appear to employ very sophisticated tactics or technology. "The defendants used two techniques to steal information. First, they used a scam known as 'spear phishing,' which involves sending misleading email messages and tricking users into disclosing their passwords and security information," Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein said in a Friday press conference. "Second, the defendants hacked into computer networks and installed malicious software that allowed them to spy on users and capture keystrokes, take screenshots and exfiltrate, or remove, data from those computers."
The malware, known as X-Agent, was installed on at least 13 DNC and DCCC systems, according to the indictment.
3. X-Agent Malware Tough to Stamp Out
The indictment also reveals that the DNC and DCCC in May 2016 hired CrowdStrike to help remediate the intrusions - which the FBI also began investigating - but that at least one piece of X-Agent Linux malware planted by attackers persisted until October 2016.
But the DNC says it doesn't believe that the Linux malware agent posed a threat after CrowdStrike remediated the intrusion. "This Linux based version of X-Agent malware was a remnant of the original hack and had been quarantined during the remediation process in June 2016,"  Adrienne Watson, the DNC's deputy communications director, told Politico in a statement. "While programmed to communicate with a GRU-registered domain, we do not have any information to suggest that it successfully communicated, exfiltrated data, corrupted our newly built systems or breached our voter file following the remediation process."
In September 2016, meanwhile, the attackers allegedly also "successfully gained access to DNC computers hosted on a third-party cloud computing service" that "contained test applications related to the DNC's analytics," the indictment says. The attackers allegedly created backups of this data, then transferred them to their own account, allowing them to obtain the actual data.
4. DCCC Network Compromise Led to DNC Hack
The indictment says the Russian agents successfully infected a DCCC employee's PC with X-Agent malware, which allowed them to log her keystrokes and capture screenshots. This victim appeared to be "patient zero" in the hacking campaign. The agents then "hacked into the DNC network from the DCCC network using stolen credentials" and by June 2016 had accessed about 33 different DNC computers, onto which they deployed the same X-Agent malware (see DNC Breach More Severe Than First Believed).
"To enable them to steal a large number of documents at once without detection, the conspirators used a publicly available tool to gather and compress multiple documents on the DCCC and DNC networks," according to the indictment. "The conspirators then used other GRU malware, known as 'X-Tunnel,' to move the stolen documents outside the DCCC and DNC networks through encrypted channels."
5. Spies Pay With Cryptocurrency
The Russian intelligence agents allegedly used bitcoins to help disguise their activities.
"Although the conspirators caused transactions to be conducted in a variety of currencies, including U.S. dollars, they principally used bitcoin when purchasing servers, registering domains and otherwise making payments in furtherance of hacking activity," according to the indictment.
The indictment alleges that the defendants, in part, generated their own bitcoins via mining - solving computational challenges that build out the public ledger of transactions, called the blockchain, for which miners can receive bitcoins as a reward.

"They principally used bitcoin when purchasing servers, registering domains, and otherwise making payments in furtherance of hacking activity."

The indictment says other bitcoins were acquired in ways designed to obscure their origin, which included "purchasing bitcoin through peer-to-peer exchanges, moving funds through other digital currencies and using pre-paid cards." The defendants also allegedly used  bitcoin tumbling services to disguise their activities (see Criminals Hide 'Billions' in Cryptocurrency, Europol Warns).
The defendants, the indictment alleges, used bitcoins "to pay a Romanian company to register the domain dcleaks.com through a payment processing company located in the United States," as well as to lease a server in Malaysia that hosted the DCLeaks.com website and which was used to target the DCCC and DNC networks via spear phishing attacks. The same bitcoin pool was also used to pay for a virtual private network account that was used to log into the Guccifer 2.0 Twitter account, authorities say (see Analysis: VPN Fail Reveals 'Guccifer 2.0' is 'Fancy Bear').
"This is the first clear example in court documents of cryptocurrency being used to purchase capabilities that could be leveraged in attacks on national security," Jonathan Levin, a co-founder of Chainalysis, a firm that helps governments track cryptocurrency payments, tells the New York Times.
6. Active Measures Have Been Industrialized
The indictment reveals that Russia's use of "active measures" - aka dezinformatsiya or disinformation, pioneered in the Soviet era - remains alive and well, Rid says.
"Active measures are semi-covert or covert intelligence operations to shape an adversary's political decisions," Rid told the Senate Intelligence Committee in March 2017 testimony. "Almost always active measures conceal or falsify the source - intelligence operators try to hide behind anonymity, or behind false flags. Active measures may also spread forged, or partly forged, content."
Rid says active measures work best when designed to exploit preexisting weaknesses in society. "The more polarized a society, the more vulnerable it is," he said. "America in 2016 was highly polarized, with myriad cracks and fissures to drive wedges into - not old wedges, but improved high-tech wedges that allowed Moscow's operators to attack their target faster, more reactively and at far larger scale than ever before."
7. Doxing Remains a Favored Attack Tactic
One active measures tactic involves doxing - stealing and releasing information on an individual or organization. And the 11-count criminal indictment against the 12 Russian intelligence agents accuses them of having participated in GRU cyber operations "that involved the staged release of stolen documents for the purpose of interfering with the 2016 president election."

"Active measures are semi-covert or covert intelligence operations to shape an adversary's political decisions." 
 
— Thomas Rid"President Putin was extremely strong and powerful in his denial today," Trump said.Trump also repeatedly asked about the Democratic National Committee's email server and Hillary Clinton's missing emails. Putin, meanwhile, claimed to not know about the "full extent" of the alleged election interference. "I don't know the full extent of the situation," he said via a translator at the press conference. "President Trump mentioned this issue. I will look into it."Twelve individuals have been named in the new indictment. "These GRU officers, in their official capacities, engaged in a sustained effort to hack into the computer networks of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, the Democratic National Committee and the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton, and released that information on the internet under the names 'DCLeaks' and 'Guccifer 2.0' and through another entity," according to the Justice Department.That other entity is only named in the indictment as "Organization 1." But the timing of its document releases aligns with when WikiLeaks began releasing the stolen DNC and DCCC information. According to the indictment, Organization 1 "released over 20,000 emails and other documents stolen from the DNC network by the conspirators," just days before the Democratic National Convention. "The latest-in-time email released through Organization 1 was dated on or about May 25, 2016, approximately the same day the conspirators hacked the DNC Microsoft Exchange Server."Leaks aside, the initial compromises, however, didn't appear to employ very sophisticated tactics or technology. "The defendants used two techniques to steal information. First, they used a scam known as 'spear phishing,' which involves sending misleading email messages and tricking users into disclosing their passwords and security information," Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein said in a Friday press conference. "Second, the defendants hacked into computer networks and installed malicious software that allowed them to spy on users and capture keystrokes, take screenshots and exfiltrate, or remove, data from those computers."The malware, known as X-Agent, was installed on at least 13 DNC and DCCC systems, according to the indictment.The indictment also reveals that the DNC and DCCC in May 2016 hired CrowdStrike to help remediate the intrusions - which the FBI also began investigating - but that at least one piece of X-Agent Linux malware planted by attackers persisted until October 2016.But the DNC says it doesn't believe that the Linux malware agent posed a threat after CrowdStrike remediated the intrusion. "This Linux based version of X-Agent malware was a remnant of the original hack and had been quarantined during the remediation process in June 2016,"  Adrienne Watson, the DNC's deputy communications director, told Politico in a statement. "While programmed to communicate with a GRU-registered domain, we do not have any information to suggest that it successfully communicated, exfiltrated data, corrupted our newly built systems or breached our voter file following the remediation process."In September 2016, meanwhile, the attackers allegedly also "successfully gained access to DNC computers hosted on a third-party cloud computing service" that "contained test applications related to the DNC's analytics," the indictment says. The attackers allegedly created backups of this data, then transferred them to their own account, allowing them to obtain the actual data.The indictment says the Russian agents successfully infected a DCCC employee's PC with X-Agent malware, which allowed them to log her keystrokes and capture screenshots. This victim appeared to be "patient zero" in the hacking campaign. The agents then "hacked into the DNC network from the DCCC network using stolen credentials" and by June 2016 had accessed about 33 different DNC computers, onto which they deployed the same X-Agent malware (see DNC Breach More Severe Than First Believed)."To enable them to steal a large number of documents at once without detection, the conspirators used a publicly available tool to gather and compress multiple documents on the DCCC and DNC networks," according to the indictment. "The conspirators then used other GRU malware, known as 'X-Tunnel,' to move the stolen documents outside the DCCC and DNC networks through encrypted channels."The Russian intelligence agents allegedly used bitcoins to help disguise their activities."Although the conspirators caused transactions to be conducted in a variety of currencies, including U.S. dollars, they principally used bitcoin when purchasing servers, registering domains and otherwise making payments in furtherance of hacking activity," according to the indictment.The indictment alleges that the defendants, in part, generated their own bitcoins via mining - solving computational challenges that build out the public ledger of transactions, called the blockchain, for which miners can receive bitcoins as a reward.The indictment says other bitcoins were acquired in ways designed to obscure their origin, which included "purchasing bitcoin through peer-to-peer exchanges, moving funds through other digital currencies and using pre-paid cards." The defendants also allegedly used  bitcoin tumbling services to disguise their activities (see Criminals Hide 'Billions' in Cryptocurrency, Europol Warns).The defendants, the indictment alleges, used bitcoins "to pay a Romanian company to register the domain dcleaks.com through a payment processing company located in the United States," as well as to lease a server in Malaysia that hosted the DCLeaks.com website and which was used to target the DCCC and DNC networks via spear phishing attacks. The same bitcoin pool was also used to pay for a virtual private network account that was used to log into the Guccifer 2.0 Twitter account, authorities say (see Analysis: VPN Fail Reveals 'Guccifer 2.0' is 'Fancy Bear')."This is the first clear example in court documents of cryptocurrency being used to purchase capabilities that could be leveraged in attacks on national security," Jonathan Levin, a co-founder of Chainalysis, a firm that helps governments track cryptocurrency payments, tells the New York Times.The indictment reveals that Russia's use of "active measures" - aka dezinformatsiya or disinformation, pioneered in the Soviet era - remains alive and well, Rid says."Active measures are semi-covert or covert intelligence operations to shape an adversary's political decisions," Rid told the Senate Intelligence Committee in March 2017 testimony. "Almost always active measures conceal or falsify the source - intelligence operators try to hide behind anonymity, or behind false flags. Active measures may also spread forged, or partly forged, content."Rid says active measures work best when designed to exploit preexisting weaknesses in society. "The more polarized a society, the more vulnerable it is," he said. "America in 2016 was highly polarized, with myriad cracks and fissures to drive wedges into - not old wedges, but improved high-tech wedges that allowed Moscow's operators to attack their target faster, more reactively and at far larger scale than ever before."One active measures tactic involves doxing - stealing and releasing information on an individual or organization. And the 11-count criminal indictment against the 12 Russian intelligence agents accuses them of having participated in GRU cyber operations "that involved the staged release of stolen documents for the purpose of interfering with the 2016 president election."Information warfare specialists say doxing allows attackers to suggest, psychologically speaking, that the victims may have had something illicit to hide, regardless of whether that is true.In the case of the DNC and DCCC hacks, stolen information was disseminated via the Guccifer 2.0 persona - which claimed to be a sole Romanian hacker - as well as the DCLeaks.com website, which claimed to have been founded by an American hacktivist. Both were Russian intelligence fronts, prosecutors say.In addition, the indictment says WikiLeaks - again, referenced only as "Organization 1" - actively solicited stolen DNC data from Guccifer 2.0 and later published a selection of the stolen information.As noted, the Russian attackers allegedly used spear phishing to infiltrate the DNC and DCCC networks. Simply put, spear phishing continues to give attackers a low-cost attack technique that succeeds at least some of the time.Referencing research collected by Secureworks into the Russian attack group that targeted Hillary Clinton's campaign, among others, Rid at Johns Hopkins reports that attackers' success rate appeared to be at least 2 percent."Out of 19,315 malicious links sent, 3,134 were clicked at least once - just above 16 percent," he said in in his Senate testimony. "If the password harvesting success rate is 1-in-7, then the total number of compromised accounts in this set would be around 470, which would mean an overall success rate of 2.4 percent. This estimate is conservative, as the total number of clicks is understated for technical reasons."The Russian intelligence agents didn't just allegedly hack the DNC and DCCC, prosecutors say.One of the 11 defendants that have been charged with hacking into computers, stealing documents and releasing them, as well as a twelfth Russian officer, have also been charged with trying to hack a state election board and election software firms."Russian GRU officers hacked the website of a state election board and stole information about 500,000 voters," Rosenstein said on Friday. While he didn't name the state, based on previous reports it appears to have been Illinois (see Will Congress Lose Midterm Elections to Hackers?)."They also hacked into computers of a company that supplied software used to verify voter registration information; they targeted state and local offices responsible for administering the elections; and they sent spear phishing emails to people involved in administering elections, including attaching malicious software," Rosenstein said.Despite the increasing list of charges, at least thus far, the Department of Justice has been careful to not call the 2016 U.S. presidential election results into question."There is no allegation in the indictment that any American was a knowing participant in the alleged unlawful activity or knew they were communicating with Russian intelligence officers," the Justice Department says. "There is no allegation in the indictment that the charged conduct altered the vote count or changed the outcome of the 2016 election."But Russia's hacking activities, according to the U.S. intelligence community, were designed to influence the elections, backed by probes of at least 21 states' election systems and the successful hacking of at least one state election board. Attackers also targeted voting machine manufacturers, prosecutors say.Director of National Intelligence Dan Coats, speaking Friday at the Hudson Institute in Washington, said such hacking - by not just Russia, but also China, Iran and North Korea - poses a clear and present danger to other nations, including the United States.In the speech, he likened the threat to the warning signs ahead of the September 11 terrorist attacks that were not heeded."It was in the months prior to September 2001 when, according to then-CIA Director George Tenet, the system was blinking red. And here we are nearly two decades later, and I'm here to say, the warning lights are blinking red again," Coats said.But Coats called out Russia as being "the most aggressive foreign actors," adding that "they continue their efforts to undermine our democracy."Executive Editor, DataBreachToday & EuropeSchwartz is an award-winning journalist with two decades of experience in magazines, newspapers and electronic media. He has covered the information security and privacy sector throughout his career. Before joining Information Security Media Group in 2014, where he now serves as the Executive Editor, DataBreachToday and for European news coverage, Schwartz was the information security beat reporter for InformationWeek and a frequent contributor to DarkReading, amongst other publications. He lives in Scotland.
  Covering topics in risk management, compliance, fraud, and information security.By submitting this form you agree to our Privacy & GDPR Statement      Data BreachBreach NotificationEncryption & Key ManagementGovernanceCybersecurityChobani - New York, NYCiti - Wilmington, DECiti - Irving, TXCity of Waco - Waco, TXScotiabank - Ottawa, OntarioContinue »
 90 minutes · Premium OnDemand 
                        OverviewFrom heightened risks to increased regulations, senior leaders at all levels are pressured to
                                    improve their organizations' risk management capabilities. But no one is showing them how -
                                    until now.Learn the fundamentals of developing a risk management program from the man who wrote the book
                                    on the topic: Ron Ross, computer scientist for the National Institute of Standards and
                                    Technology. In an exclusive presentation, Ross, lead author of NIST Special Publication 800-37
                                    - the bible of risk assessment and management - will share his unique insights on how to:Sr. Computer Scientist & Information Security Researcher,
                                            National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)Was added to your briefcase10 Takeaways: Russian Election Interference Indictment10 Takeaways: Russian Election Interference IndictmentSign in now Need help registering?
Contact support 
Complete your profile and stay up to dateContact Support Create an ISMG account now Need help registering?
Contact support 
Sign in now Need help registering?
Contact support 
Sign in now Our website uses cookies. Cookies enable us to provide the best experience possible and help us understand how visitors use our website. By browsing bankinfosecurity.com, you agree to our use of cookies.
2017 Data Breaches – The Worst So FarIn 2016, reported data breaches increased by 40%. Yahoo also announced the largest data breach in history last year, affecting more than one billion accounts. What will 2017 hold? We’re hoping for the best, but you may just see 2017 data breaches get even more messy and serious.**Learn more about IdentityForce’s Data Breach Rapid Response Plan for businesses here.**Note: This post will be continuously updated with new information as additional 2017 data breaches are reported. January 8, 2017: On December 30, 2016, ESEA, one of the largest video gaming communities, issued a warning to players after discovering a breach. At the time, it wasn’t known what was stolen and how many people were affected. However, in January, LeakedSource revealed that 1,503,707 ESEA records had been added to its database and that leaked records included a great deal of private information: registration date, city, state, last login, username, first and last name, bcrypt hash, email address, date of birth, zip code, phone number, website URL, Steam ID, Xbox ID, and PSN ID.February 1, 2017: Security expert Troy Hunt, of the website Have I Been Pwned?, revealed that Xbox 360 ISO and PSP ISO had been hacked in September 2015. The websites, both forums which host illegal video game download files, housed sensitive user information that was taken. 1.2 million Xbox 360 ISO users and 1.3 million PSP ISO users were affected and may have had their e-mail addresses, IP addresses, usernames, and passwords stolen in the breach. At this time, it’s not clear who is responsible, but forum users were encouraged to change their passwords immediately.February 7, 2017: IHG, the company that owns popular hotel chains like Crowne Plaza, Holiday Inn, Candlewood Suites, and Kimpton Hotels, announced a data breach that affected 12 of its properties. Malware was found on servers which processed payments made at on-site restaurants and bars; travelers that used cards at the front desk did not have information taken. The malware was active from August 2016 to December 2016 and stolen data includes cardholder names, card numbers, expiration dates, and internal verification codes. Some targeted locations include Sevens Bar & Grill at Crowne Plaza San Jose-Silicon Valley, the Bristol Bar & Grille at the Holiday Inn in San Francisco’s Fisherman’s Wharf, InterContinental San Francisco, Aruba’s Holiday Inn Resort, and InterContinental Los Angeles Century City.February 17, 2017: The national fast food chain acknowledged a data breach after being pressed by the website KrebsOnSecurity. The company admitted that they had been notified in mid-January about a possible breach in select restaurants, but the FBI asked them not to go public yet. Malware was placed on payment systems inside certain Arby’s corporate stores, which make up about one-third of all Arby’s in the nation. There are about 1,000 corporate Arby’s restaurants, and while not all were affected, it’s not clear yet how many were. The company says that the malware has been removed, but the scope of the breach is not yet known. Arby’s did not say when the breach occurred, but one credit union believes it may have been between October 25, 2016 and January 19, 2017.March 6, 2017: A group of spammers, operating under the name River City Media, unknowingly released their private data into cyberspace after failing to properly configure their backups. The leak known as Spammergate included Hipchat logs, domain registration records, accounting details, infrastructure planning, production notes, scripts, business affiliations, and more. The biggest discovery, however, was a database of 1.4 billion email accounts, IP addresses, full names, and some physical addresses. Thankfully, the “good guys” found the information—in this situation, it was Chris Vickery, a security researcher for MacKeeper—and reported everything to the proper authorities.At this time, it’s unclear what’s going to happen to River City Media. While law enforcement is involved, groups like River City Media often have all sorts of aliases and affiliate programs—no one can be sure they will all be wiped out.March 7, 2017: KrebsOnSecurity revealed that Verifone, the largest maker of point-of-sale credit card terminals used in the U.S., discovered a breach of its internal network in January 2017. When asked, Verifone said the breach didn’t affect its payment services network and was only within the corporate network. The company claims they responded to the breach immediately and “the potential for misuse of information is limited.” Sources say there’s evidence that a Russian hacking group is responsible for the breach, and that the intruders may have been inside Verifone’s network since mid-2016, but nothing has been confirmed.March 15, 2017: Dun & Bradstreet, a huge business services company, found its marketing database with over 33 million corporate contacts shared across the web in March 2017. The firm claims its systems were not breached, but that it has sold the 52GB database to thousands of companies across the country; it’s unclear which of those businesses suffered the breach that exposed the records. Millions of employees from organizations like the U.S. Department of Defense, the U.S. Postal Service, AT&T, Wal-Mart, and CVS Health had information leaked, and the database may have included full names, work email addresses, phone numbers, and other business-related data.March 19, 2017: BuzzFeed broke the news that customer information was available in plain text via a specific link on the Saks Fifth Avenue website. The information for tens of thousands of customers was visible on a page where customers could join a wait list for products they were interested in. While payment details were not exposed, it was possible to see email addresses, phone numbers, product codes, and IP addresses. When BuzzFeed contacted Hudson Bay Company, the Canada-based organization that owns Saks Fifth Avenue, the pages containing customer information were taken down. At this time, it’s not clear how this happened, how customers may have been affected, and who was responsible.March 20, 2017: 1,300 letters were sent to prenatal patients who had received care in the University of North Carolina Health Care System about a potential data breach they may have been affected by. UNC Health Care revealed that women who had completed pregnancy home risk screening forms at prenatal appointments between 2014 and 2017 at the Women’s Clinic at N.C. Women’s Hospital and UNC Maternal-Fetal Medicine at Rex may have mistakenly had their personal information transmitted to local county health departments. Breached information included full names, addresses, races, ethnicities, Social Security numbers, and a variety of health-related information. The county health departments are subject to federal and state privacy laws and must protect all information they received; it was also requested that they electronically purge electronic information about non-Medicaid patients.March 21, 2017: America’s JobLink, a web-based system that connects job seekers and employers, revealed its systems were breached by a hacker who exploited a misconfiguration in the application code. The criminal was able to gain access to the personal information of 4.8 million job seekers, including full names, birth dates, and Social Security numbers.Activity was uncovered in the ten states that use the America’s JobLink system: Alabama, Arkansas, Arizona, Delaware, Idaho, Illinois, Kansas, Maine, Oklahoma, and Vermont. The code misconfiguration was discovered and eliminated on March 14, 2017, so anyone who had an account with America’s JobLink before March 14, 2017 may have been affected and had their personal information compromised.**Learn more about IdentityForce’s Data Breach Rapid Response Plan for businesses here.**April 6, 2017: The IRS revealed that up to 100,000 taxpayers may have had their personal information stolen in a scheme involving the IRS Data Retrieval Tool, which is used to complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). In March 2017, federal officials observed a potential data breach and took the tool down. The IRS said it shut down the Data Retrieval Tool because identity thieves that had obtained some personal information outside of the tax system were possibly using the tool to steal additional data.Currently, the agency suspects that less than 8,000 fraudulent returns were filed, processed, and returns issued, costing $30 million. 52,000 returns were stopped by IRS filters and 14,000 illegal refund claims were halted as well.April 19, 2017: When IHG first announced a data breach in February 2017, it was believed that only 12 of its properties had been affected. It’s been revealed, however, that the initial 12 has jumped to 1,200. IHG said the dozen hotels initially named were only the ones they run directly and at the time, they did not know the full scope of the breach; the other hotels are IHG-branded franchise properties. The malware had infected hotel servers, but was eradicated in all locations by the end of March.April 25, 2017: Chipotle posted a “Notice of Data Security Incident” on its website to let customers know about unauthorized activity it detected on the network that supports in-restaurant payment processes. It believes payment card transactions that occurred from March 24, 2017 through April 18, 2017 may have been affected. The investigation is still ongoing and at the time the notice was published, the company did not have any additional information; it just said that it believes it has stopped the unauthorized activity and it’s too early to give more details.May 2, 2017: Sabre Hospitality Solutions, a tech company that provides reservation system services for more than 36,000 properties, revealed a breach that allowed hotel customer payment information to be compromised. The company shared the information in its quarterly filing report and did not say when the breach happened or which locations may have been affected. The unauthorized access has been shut off and the company does not believe any other Sabre systems have been compromised.May 3, 2017: Gmail users were targeted in a sophisticated phishing scam that was seeking to gain access to accounts through a third-party app. The emails were made to look like they were from a user’s trusted contact and notified the individual that they wanted to share a Google Doc with them. Once clicked, the link led to Google’s real security page where the person was prompted to allow a fake Google Docs app to manage his or her email account. Google put a stop to the scam in about one hour and the company says they estimate about 1 million users may have been affected.May 10, 2017: Thousands of HIPAA-protected medical records were exposed in a data breach due to a misconfigured Rsync backup server hosted by a third party, iHealth. At least 7,000 patients who visited the Bronx Lebanon Hospital Center in New York between 2014 and 2017 may have had extremely personal information compromised. Leaked information has been reported to include names, home addresses, religious affiliations, addiction histories, mental health and medical diagnoses, HIV statuses, and sexual assault and domestic violence reports. Once the breach was detected, the hospital and iHealth took immediate steps to protect the exposed data.May 12, 2017: If you shopped at a Brooks Brothers retail store or outlet in the last year and used a credit or debit card, you may have had your card data stolen. Brooks Brothers revealed a breach that affected some of their stores between April 4, 2016, and March 1, 2017; the retailer has not revealed which exact locations were targeted yet. A forensic investigation showed an unauthorized individual installed malicious software on some payment processing systems that was capable of collecting payment card information. Brooks Brothers said the issue has been resolved but did not provide any other details upon announcing the breach.May 17, 2017: Customers and users of the electronic signature provider DoguSign were targeted recently by malware phishing attacks. DocuSign says that hackers breached one of its systems, but they only obtained email addresses and no other personal information. The hackers used the email addresses to conduct a malicious email campaign in which DocuSign-branded messages were sent that prompted recipients to click and download a Microsoft Word document that contained malware. If you received a suspicious DocuSign email, forward it to spam@docusign.com; moving forward, only access documents directly through the DocuSign website and not by clicking email links.May 31, 2017: OneLogin, a San Francisco-based company that allows users to manage logins to multiple sites and apps through a cloud-based platform, has reported a troubling data breach. OneLogin provides single sign-on and identity management for about 2,000 companies in 44 countries, over 300 app vendors and more than 70 software-as-a-service providers. A threat actor obtained access to a set of AWS keys and used them to access the AWS API from an intermediate host with another, smaller service provider in the US. The attack began at 2am PST on May 31 and was shut down by 9am. Customer data was compromised during this time, including the ability to decrypt encrypted data. The investigation is ongoing and the full extent of the breach is still unknown.May 31, 2017: Sears Holdings, the parent company of Kmart, revealed that Kmart’s store payment systems were infected with malware; Kmart.com and Sears shoppers were not impacted by this breach. The malicious code has been removed, but the company has not shared how long the payment system was under attack and how many stores were affected. No personal identifying information was compromised, but certain credit card numbers may have been. Kmart suffered a very similar data breach back in 2014, that we also told you about at the time.June 14, 2017: The University of Oklahoma’s (OU) student-run newspaper, The Oklahoma Daily, was the first to discover an on-campus data breach connected to the university’s document sharing system, Delve. Educational records, dating back to at least 2002, were unintentionally exposed through incorrect privacy settings. The Oklahoma Daily reported that in just 30 of the hundreds of documents made publicly discoverable on Microsoft Office Delve, there were more than 29,000 instances in which students’ private information was made public to users within OU’s email system. Sensitive information included Social Security numbers, financial aid information, and grades. The file sharing service has been shut down until further notice.June 15, 2017: A hard drive containing the personal information of approximately one million people was stolen from a Washington State University storage unit in Olympia, WA. The hard drive was inside an 85-pound safe, so the university says it has no current reason to believe the individual was able to get inside the safe and steal the data on the hard drive. Information on the hard drive was part of research the university had conducted for school districts, government offices, and other outside agencies; Social Security numbers and health history were among the personal details stolen. The university has sent letters to individuals who may have been affected and will be offering them a free year of credit monitoring.June 20, 2017: Last year, the Republican National Committee hired Deep Root Analytics, a data analytics firm, to gather political information about U.S. voters. Chris Vickery, a cyber risk analyst, discovered that the sensitive information Deep Root Analytics obtained–personal data for roughly 198 million American citizens–was stored on an Amazon cloud server without password protection for almost two weeks this month. Exposed information includes names, dates of birth, home addresses, phone numbers, and voter registration details. Deep Root has taken full responsibility, updated the access settings, and put protocols in place to prevent further access.June 27, 2017: Health insurance company Anthem has agreed to a $115 million settlement in connection with a 2015 data breach that impacted 80 million of their customers across their Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Georgia, Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Amerigroup, Caremore, Unicare, Healthlink, and DeCare brands.Although Anthem acted quickly, notifying the FBI and working with a cyber security firm as soon as it was made aware of the breach, the breadth of the initial breach and subsequent costly payout just goes to reinforce the need for companies of all sizes to take cyber security issues seriously.While the settlement still needs to be approved by the courts during a hearing on August 17th, the health insurance giant released a statement, stating “Nevertheless, we are pleased to be putting this litigation behind us, and to be providing additional substantial benefits to individuals whose data was or may have been involved in the cyberattack and who will now be members of the settlement class.”Anthem originally agreed to provide impacted individuals with 2 years of credit monitoring services. They are extending that offer for an additional 2 years, as part of this settlement.**Learn more about IdentityForce’s Data Breach Rapid Response Plan for businesses here.**July 10, 2017: A subsidiary of the California Association of Realtors—Real Estate Business Services (REBS)—was the victim of a data breach; it was recently reported to the California Attorney General’s Office. The organization’s store.car.org online payment system was infected with malware that was active between March 13, 2017, and May 15, 2017. When a user made a payment on the website during that time frame, personal information may have been copied by the malware and transmitted to an unknown third party. Sensitive data that had the potential to be accessed included the user’s name, address, credit card number, credit card expiration date, and credit card verification codes. The malware has been removed and the organization is now using PayPal for payments.July 13, 2017: A reported 14 million Verizon subscribers may have been affected by a data breach, and you might be one of them if you have contacted Verizon customer service in the past six months. These records were held on a server that was controlled by Israel based Nice Systems. The data breach was discovered by Chris Vickery, who is with the security firm, UpGuard. He informed Verizon of the data exposure in late-June, and it took more than a week to secure the breached data. The actual data that was obtained were log files that became generated when customers of Verizon contacted the company via phone.September 2, 2017: Over 9,000 documents containing the personal information of job seekers with Top Secret clearance were publicly available on an unsecured Amazon server for just over six months. UpGuard, a cybersecurity firm, found the public files in a folder labeled “resumes” and reached out to TigerSwan, a private security firm that owned the files. It was discovered that a third-party vendor that TigerSwan had ended their contract with—TalentPen—had failed to take down the files after they were transferred to TigerSwan in February. TalentPen left the files in a bucket site on Amazon Web Services without a password or any type of security until August 24, 2017 when Amazon contacted them about it; at that point, the files were taken down.September 7, 2017: Equifax, one of the three largest credit agencies in the U.S., suffered a breach that may affect 143 million consumers. Due to the sensitivity of data stolen—including Social Security numbers and driver’s license numbers—this is being called one of the worst breaches ever. Hackers were able to gain access to the company’s system from mid-May to July by exploiting a weak point in website software; the breach was discovered by Equifax on July 29th, 2017 and at that time, they sought assistance from an outside forensics firm. Other compromised data is said to include full names, addresses, dates of birth, credit card numbers, and other personal information.September 21, 2017: Jay Clayton, Chairman of the SEC, issued a statement about cybersecurity and included details of a 2016 data breach. Clayton wrote that in 2016, a software vulnerability in the test filing component of the SEC’s EDGAR system was discovered and patched “promptly.” However, in August 2017, the SEC learned that incident “may have provided the basis for illicit gain through trading.” The vulnerability allowed access to nonpublic information, but the SEC does not believe there has been any unauthorized access to personally identifiable information.September 21, 2017: SVR Tracking, a San-Diego based service that gives auto dealership and lot owners the ability to locate and recover vehicles, allowed more than half a million customer records to be leaked online. On September 18, Kromtech Security Center found 540,642 records in an unsecured Amazon S3 bucket and notified SVR Tracking of their findings on September 20; SVR secured the bucket within three hours. However, it is unknown how long the information was publicly available online and the data was quite sensitive in nature—it included email addresses, passwords, license plate numbers, VINs, and even the ability to see every single place a vehicle has been in the last 120 days.September 25, 2017: A breach that affected Deloitte, a multinational professional services firm, in March came to light—and the reason is pretty embarrassing for a company that was once named the “best cybersecurity consultant in the world” by Gartner. The firm did not employ two-factor authentication, so when hackers acquired a single password from an administrator of the firm’s email account, they were able to access all areas of the email system. Investigators determined that Deloitte’s biggest clients were of interest to the hackers, but Deloitte insists only a small fraction of its clients have been impacted.September 26, 2017: KrebsOnSecurity reported a breach at fast food chain Sonic after discovering a “fire sale” of millions of stolen credit and debit card numbers on the Dark Web. Sonic learned about the breach when its credit card processor notified them of unusual activity on customer payment cards. Sonic has almost 3,600 stores in 45 states, but it is not immediately known which locations were affected—the company is working with law enforcement and investigators to determine the true scope of the breach. September 28, 2017: Whole Foods Market—recently acquired by Amazon—made a statement regarding the discovery of a recent breach of its payment systems. Individuals who shopped in the company’s grocery stores were likely not affected, but it is believed the unauthorized access occurred in Whole Foods locations with taprooms and full table-service restaurants. The company is currently in the middle of an ongoing investigation and has said it will provide additional updates as it learns more. It has also said that Amazon’s payment systems are not connected to Whole Foods and no Amazon transactions were impacted by the breach.**Learn more about IdentityForce’s Data Breach Rapid Response Plan for businesses here.**October 6, 2017: Disqus, a blog comment hosting service, revealed that it was targeted by hackers five years ago. The company had no idea it had been the victim of a data breach in 2012 until the website Have I Been Pwned?reached out with exposed user information it had found. In a statement, Disqus says it verified the authenticity of the data and found it was from their 2012 user database, which included information dating back to 2007. User email addresses, user names, sign-up dates, and last-login dates were among the stolen data; hashed passwords using SHA1 with a salt for approximately one-third of users were also public. Disqus does not believe there is any evidence of unauthorized logins, but it has reset the passwords of all affected users.October 9, 2017: In December 2016, it was reported that “more than 1 billion user accounts” may have been impacted by the 2013 Yahoo breach. Recent news, however, shows it was indeed more than 1 billion—much more. Four months after Verizon acquired Yahoo’s core internet assets, it was revealed that every single customer account was impacted by that breach; three billion Yahoo accounts—including email, Tumblr, Fantasy, and Flickr—were stolen. Even after thorough investigations, it is still unknown who was behind the 2013 Yahoo breach.October 12, 2017: After suffering a data breach in December 2015, the Hyatt hotel chain has fallen victim to hackers again. The company discovered unauthorized access to its payment card information for debit and credit cards that were swiped at the front desks of some of its properties. Stolen information includes card numbers, expiration dates, internal verification codes, and cardholder names. At this point, Hyatt believes 41 of its properties in 11 countries were affected between March 18, 2017 and July 2, 2017. Only five properties in the U.S. were targeted: three were in Hawaii, while one was in Puerto Rico, and the other in Guam. Hyatt has provided a list of all affected properties that prior guests can check.November 14, 2017: Los Angeles-based clothing retailer Forever 21 announced that some of its customers may have been affected by a potential data breach. Upon receiving a tip from a third-party, Forever 21 launched an investigation and found certain point-of-sale (PoS) devices were compromised—likely between March and October of this year. The company said it implemented “encryption and tokenization solutions” in 2015 and that it appears the targeted PoS devices would have had encryption that was not operating. At the time of the announcement the investigation was still occurring, so it is not known how many people may have been impacted by this breach or who is responsible. Forever 21 customers are encouraged to keep an eye on their payment accounts and look for fraudulent charges.November 14, 2017: Residents of Maine receiving foster care benefits had their personal information exposed on a third-party website outside of the State of Maine system. During a system upgrade on September 21, 2017, a contractor hired by Maine Office of Information Technology accidentally posted the private information, which included names of foster children and legal guardians, addresses, and Social Security numbers. The information was publicly available for approximately four and a half hours that day; once it was discovered, the data was removed from the site. The personal information was accessed once during that time period, but Maine’s Chief Information Officer Jim Smith said “there is no indication that there is any intent by a third party to misuse your personal data.”November 21, 2017: The ride-sharing service giant Uber revealed that in late 2016, it became aware of a data breach that potentially exposed the personal information of 57 million Uber users and drivers. However, the company chose to pay the hackers $100,000 to keep the enormous data breach a secret, instead of immediately alerting those affected by the breach. How did this happen? Hackers did not gain access to Uber’s internal systems, but rather GitHub, a service that Uber’s engineers use to collaborate on software code. Two hackers downloaded the data stored on GitHub, which included names, email addresses, and phone numbers of Uber users worldwide. With our lives becoming busier by the minute, more and more people are relying on services like Uber to make their lives a bit easier and more convenient. Unfortunately, it’s becoming painfully clear that often times, that convenience comes at cost. Who would have thought that a simple ride to the airport could potentially cost you your identity?November 24, 2017: Imgur, the online image-sharing community, had a lot to be thankful for on Thanksgiving—until it received a notification that day about a possible data breach from 2014. Troy Hunt, the owner of the website Have I Been Pwned, reached out to Imgur’s COO on November 23, 2017 to let him know that he had received data that seemed to include the emails and passwords of Imgur users. The company investigated, and by the next morning, had discovered 1.7 million users from 2014 had indeed had their email addresses and passwords stolen. Imgur contacted affected users immediately on November 24 and publicly disclosed the breach on their website that day as well.December 1, 2017: Due to a vulnerability in their network, TIO Networks, who was recently acquired by PayPal, may have compromised the identities of over 1.6 million customers. The compromised data includes bank account information, payment card information, passwords and usernames for accounts, and Social Security numbers. Although there has been no evidence that any of customer data has been stolen, they are still treating this incident as a data breach. PayPal is offering free credit monitoring services to those impacted by this breach.December 10, 2017:  Due to a customer privacy leak, the personal information of many eBay customers, including usernames, first and last names, and purchase history, were made available via a Google’s Shopping platform.The breach was due to “an improper feed signal” between the two companies. According to an eBay spokesperson, the companies are trying to find the root cause.  The purchase histories that were leaked revealed very sensitive products, such as HIV home test kits, pregnancy test, and drug testing kits. Within a couple days, the users real names were masked with dashes. This is just another example of one of the many ways that your personal information can become compromised, through no fault of your own.December 19, 2017:  Alteryx, a California-based data analytics firm, was found culpable of not protecting the personal information of more than 120 million American households. The company had purchased this data from Experian, a giant credit reporting agency similar to Equifax. What we now know is that the exposed data was openly housed on an Amazon Web Services cloud storage bucket. All that anyone needed to access peoples’ private information was the URL, along with an Amazon AWS account. The impact of this breach is yet to be seen, but could very well be substantial based on the information that was available to potential cybercriminals. We will update this post as further details emerge.
Heidi DaitchHeidi is the Chief Strategy Officer of EZShield + IdentityForce. Heidi is responsible for driving product strategy, creating customizable solutions, and streamlining processes to ensure innovation and thought leadership in a rapidly changing cybersecurity industry. She also works closely with all business units to align the product roadmap with overall company goals.See All of Heidi Daitch's Posts A new IRS ruling recognizes employer paid ID theft protection as a non-taxable, nonreportable benefit.You can deduct this cost when you provide the benefit to your employees.

IdentityForce has been protecting government agencies since 1995.IdentityForce is a leading provider of proactive identity, privacy and credit protection for individuals, businesses, and government agencies.
Subscribe to our Newsletter for Identity Theft Updates:Thank you for signing up.© 2018 IdentityForce, Inc.
By Anita Kumar, Kevin G. Hall and Ben WiederMcClatchy Washington Bureau

                            June 06, 2017 07:27 PM
                        



 It wasn’t just the National Security Agency that knew about Russian attempts to infiltrate U.S. voting systems.In the weeks leading to the 2016 presidential election, the then-leader of the Democratic National Committee warned the Department of Homeland Security that voter registration and absentee voting lists might have been sabotaged.Donna Brazile, who was serving as the party’s acting chairwoman, said she also urged Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus to learn more about the possible problems and to sign a joint statement with her, raising these concerns to DHS.Priebus declined, Brazile told McClatchy on Tuesday.“There is fear that the goal of a hacker attack on the voter list is to delete or alter names or other information and cause incidents at the polling stations,” Brazile wrote in an Oct. 18 letter to Priebus, now President Donald Trump’s chief of staff.DHS officials assured her that investigators would contact election officials in all 50 states as part of its investigation into Russia’s attempted hacking into election machinery, which according to a new report, was broader than previously known.State and local election officials, including those whose systems were targeted, said they were contacted but were not told about the seriousness of a potential hack or that Russia was the instigator.“Why weren’t election officials made aware of the threat to protect their systems?” asked Kay Stimson, spokeswoman for the National Association of Secretaries of States.A National Security Agency report completed just weeks ago outlined a Russian spear-phishing scheme that launched repeated attacks on a Florida-based elections systems vendor, VR Systems, by sending deceptive emails to more than 100 local election officials in eight states, according to a report on the news website the Intercept.Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election — something Trump dismisses despite his intelligence agencies attesting to Moscow’s interference — first caught national attention in June 2016, when reports emerged that a hacker had compromised the account of an employee in Gila County in Arizona but failed to access the state’s voter-registration database.About the same time Arizona’s system suffered a first-level breach, hackers now thought to be working for Russia got into the Illinois voter-registration systems.“Our incursion was an SQL injection. It wasn't an email with an infected file,” said Ken Menzel, general counsel for Board of Elections, referring to an attack on the database. “Everything we had was turned over to FBI and Homeland. And I guess they analyzed the hell out of it.”The FBI issued a flash alert to state election boards in June 2016, warning that their voter registration databases were being targeted by hackers, though it didn’t describe them as Russians.By July, hackers were able to download data, “something on the order of 80,000 documents before we were able to stop it,” Menzel said. The information obtained by the hackers included names, addresses, drivers-license numbers and the last four digits of Social Security number.Then, in August, an FBI alert listed identifier numbers that traced to a Russian company in forlorn Siberia called King Servers. McClatchy talked with its young owner Vladimir Fomenko, who said he was not the hacker but provided details such as how the hacker or hackers were paid.Congress learned in September that there had been additional attempts by hackers to intrude on state voter registration databases “beyond those we knew about in July and August.” That information was delivered to lawmakers by FBI Director James Comey — fired by Trump in May and scheduled to testify Thursday on his investigation into the president’s team’s ties to Russian operatives.Comey told Congress that states were being advised “to make sure that their dead bolts are thrown and their locks are on.” However, he said it would be very difficult to penetrate the voting systems in the United States “because it is so clunky and dispersed.”After the DNC’s databases and voter files were tampered with, Brazile said she and three others — lawyer Michael Sussman, top DNC staffer Tom McMahon and former Democratic operative Matthew Miller — had a meeting with DHS on Oct. 17 to raise the alarm about whether voters could be purged from databases and voters’ precincts could be scrambled. A day after that meeting, Brazile sent the letter to Priebus, asking him join her in a statement affirming voters’ rights to have their votes counted and referencing possible problems with election systems.DHS declined to comment on the meeting with Brazile. The White House and RNC did not return messages.“I said from Day One that the so-called meddling and interference didn’t just have to do with hacked emails,” Brazile said. “We raised all these questions.”Democrats, including many who worked for Hillary Clinton, said the report answers some questions they had about the extent of the attack but that they do not plan to challenge the election results. Clinton’s office did not respond to a request for comment.Sen. Mark Warner, the top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, said Russian attacks on election systems were broader than even those leaked to the Intercept.“The Russians attempt to interfere in the election was broad based and I would like to work with communities to make sure more states come forward if they were attacked,” said Warner of Virginia. “This is one more example of this coordinated Russia effort. The notion was small or one off is just not accurate.”Congress and the FBI are investigating whether Trump’s presidential campaign had colluded with Russia in the hacking and public release emails, documents and voicemails by Democratic and Clinton staffers.VR Systems, based in Tallahassee, issued a statement, attributed to its CEO Mindy Perkins, late Monday suggesting it was notified by a customer about an email with an attachment that purported to come from the company but didn’t — a practice called phishing.“We are only aware of a handful of our customers who actually received the fraudulent email and of those, we have no indication that any of them clicked on the attachment or were compromised as a result,” the statement said. “Phishing and spear-phishing are not uncommon in our society.”Still unclear is the degree that U.S. intelligence agencies are sharing information about cyber threats with state officials or each other. A unit of DHS that assists state and local election officials made its cybersecurity services available in the months leading up to the election, said a department official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the matter is sensitive. The agency’s services included “cyber hygiene scans” conducted remotely and assessments of each jurisdiction’s risks and vulnerabilities, the official said.The official said DHS only serves those states that seek assistance and declined to identify which jurisdictions requested help in securing their voting systems last year. The National Association of Secretaries of State said 33 states and 36 counties took assistance from DHS, but declined to name which states and counties.The leaked NSA report did not say whether agency cyber sleuths tracked the Russian operations in the final week before the Nov. 8 election in time to issue an additional alert to state and federal officials.EDITORS: STORY CAN END HEREState officials moved quickly on Tuesday to assure voters that their votes were not affected.But experts say there are limits to what state election boards can do to secure their systems in an era in which 32 states have opted to allow at least some form of online voting, despite warnings from cyber security experts that it’s not secure. More importantly, experts say, is the need to conduct audits of the vote, matching electronic votes with paper backups, or post-election forensic exams that would reveal any breaches.Duncan Buell, a computer science professor at the University of South Carolina who has been closely involved in the issue, said “it can be very hard to even get (state elections officials) to admit that they are aware of the obvious security issues and take steps to mitigate the exposure, even when the stuff is obvious.”Buell said the state officials with whom he has spoken “seem sincere” and “want to do the right thing,” but few have the expertise fully grasp the threat.While state election officials often stress that certain systems aren’t connected to the internet, Buell said, neither were centrifuges in Iran’s nuclear weapons program. U.S. operatives circulated flash drives containing a Stuxnet virus that eventually found its way into the program and “broke” the centrifuges, he said.Alex Roarty and Greg Gordon contributed to this report.Anita Kumar: 202-383-6017, @anitakumar01HOW STATES RESPONDED Election officials in eight states using VR Systems software were potentially affected by Russia’s attempted infiltration into U.S. voting systems: Florida, California, Illinois, Indiana, New York, North Carolina, Virginia and West Virginia. In California: Only one of the state's 58 counties, Humboldt County, had used VR Systems software in the past but not in this election cycle, said Secretary of State Alex Padilla. "There is no evidence of any breach of elections systems in California," he said.In Florida: Seminole County Supervisor of Elections Michael Ertel confirmed that he received a call from the company on the morning of Nov. 1, a busy period of early voting. “We immediately checked that none of our folks had opened an email,” Ertel told McClatchy. It wasn’t until this week that he learned that Russia is blamed for it.Citrus County Election Supervisor Susan Gill got a similar warning.“We just deleted it, we didn’t think too much more about it until this (NSA) report and the big story,” she said.The Florida Department of State confirmed in a statement Tuesday that department officials were on a call with the FBI in late September “but there was no indication of a Florida-specific issue. They did not provide any information specific to VR Systems.”In Illinois: Along with Arizona, it was one of two states to suffer a breach last June. It was not targeted by phishing but rather a malware that targeted the state's voter-registration database. "The incursion occurred in late June. And we discovered them very early in July when they began downloading data," said Ken Menzel, chief counsel for the Illinois Board of Elections.In Indiana: The Secretary of State’s office said six counties use the VR Systems software to check voter identifies against registration.“We have not been contacted. We recently have had meetings with our counties … and we haven’t heard anything from them either about being contacted” by U.S. authorities, said Valerie Warycha, a spokeswoman. “We have no knowledge that they were a subject of the breach.”In New York: Four counties use VR Systems software on laptops or tablets as a voter-lookup tool, said Tom Connolly, spokesman for the state’s Board of Elections. The equipment was not connected to the voting system, he said, and would not have been used within 20 days of the election.“We still to this date have not seen any evidence that there was a successful compromise of any system in New York State,” Connolly said.In North Carolina: The State Board of Elections confirmed that 21 counties use VR Systems electronic poll-book software and is investigating attempts to compromise the software. A spokesman said he was unaware if any of the counties received or clicked on a phishing e-mail. On Election Day in Durham County, problems with polling books led to long lines at the polls, prompting some voters to depart without casting ballots.“We did an extensive investigation, a full forensic investigation of the poll books,” Election Board Chairman William Brian Jr. said. “What the investigation showed was there was nothing wrong with the software.”“The software is not used during early voting and does not play any role in ballot marking or vote tabulation,” the state elections board said in a statement.In Virginia: The Department of Elections issued a statement Tuesday, confirming it is aware of the NSA document and is “currently reviewing this matter and have been in contact with federal, state, and local officials regarding this issue.”In West Virginia: West Virginia does not have a statewide contract with VR Systems, and the office of its secretary of state said it was unsure if any counties that use the company’s software received the infected emails linked by the NSA to Russia.

                            View More Video
                        
Real-time updates and all local stories you want right in the palm of your hand.
A gang of teen hackers snatched the keys to Microsoft's videogame empire. Then they went too far.The trip to Delaware was only supposed to last a day. David Pokora, a bespectacled University of Toronto senior with scraggly blond hair down to his shoulders, needed to travel south to fetch a bumper that he’d bought for his souped-up Volks­wagen Golf R.The American seller had balked at shipping to Canada, so Pokora arranged to have the part sent to a buddy, Justin May, who lived in Wilmington. The young men, both ardent gamers, shared a fascination with the inner workings of the Xbox; though they’d been chatting and collaborating for years, they’d never met in person. Pokora planned to make the eight-hour drive on a Friday, grab a leisurely dinner with May, then haul the metallic-blue bumper back home to Mississauga, Ontario, that night or early the next morning. His father offered to tag along so they could take turns behind the wheel of the family’s Jetta.An hour into their journey on March 28, 2014, the Pokoras crossed the Lewiston–Queenston Bridge and hit the border checkpoint on the eastern side of the Niagara Gorge. An American customs agent gently quizzed them about their itinerary as he scanned their passports in his booth. He seemed ready to wave the Jetta through when something on his monitor caught his eye.“What’s … Xenon?” the agent asked, stumbling over the pronunciation of the word.David, who was in the passenger seat, was startled by the question. Xenon was one of his online aliases, a pseudonym he often used—along with Xenomega and DeToX—when playing Halo or discussing his Xbox hacking projects with fellow programmers. Why would that nickname, familiar to only a handful of gaming fanatics, pop up when his passport was checked?Pokora’s puzzlement lasted a few moments before he remembered that he’d named his one-man corporation Xenon Development Studios; the business processed payments for the Xbox service he operated that gave monthly subscribers the ability to unlock achievements or skip levels in more than 100 different games. He mentioned the company to the customs agent, making sure to emphasize that it was legally registered. The agent instructed the Pokoras to sit tight for just a minute longer.May 2018. Subscribe to WIRED.As he and his father waited for permission to enter western New York, David detected a flutter of motion behind the idling Jetta. He glanced back and saw two men in dark uniforms approaching the car, one on either side. “Something’s wrong,” his father said, an instant before a figure appeared outside the passenger-­side window. As a voice barked at him to step out of the vehicle, Pokora realized he’d walked into a trap.In the detention area of the adjoining US Customs and Border Protection building, an antiseptic room with a lone metal bench, Pokora pondered all the foolish risks he’d taken while in thrall to his Xbox obsession. When he’d started picking apart the console’s software a decade earlier, it had seemed like harmless fun—a way for him and his friends to match wits with the corporate engineers whose ranks they yearned to join. But the Xbox hacking scene had turned sordid over time, its ethical norms corroded by the allure of money, thrills, and status. And Pokora had gradually become enmeshed in a series of schemes that would have alarmed his younger self: infiltrating game developers’ networks, counterfeiting an Xbox prototype, even abetting a burglary on Microsoft’s main campus.Pokora had long been aware that his misdeeds had angered some powerful interests, and not just within the gaming industry; in the course of seeking out all things Xbox, he and his associates had wormed into American military networks too. But in those early hours after his arrest, Pokora had no clue just how much legal wrath he’d brought upon his head: For eight months he’d been under sealed indictment for conspiring to steal as much as $1 billion worth of intellectual property, and federal prosecutors were intent on making him the first foreign hacker to be convicted for the theft of American trade secrets. Several of his friends and colleagues would end up being pulled into the vortex of trouble he’d helped create; one would become an informant, one would become a fugitive, and one would end up dead.Pokora could see his father sitting in a room outside the holding cell, on the other side of a thick glass partition. He watched as a federal agent leaned down to inform the elder Pokora, a Polish-born construction worker, that his only son wouldn’t be returning to Canada for a very long time; his father responded by burying his head in his calloused hands.Gutted to have caused the usually stoic man such anguish, David wished he could offer some words of comfort. “It’s going to be OK, dad,” he said in a soft voice, gesturing to get his attention. “It’s going to be OK.” But his father couldn’t hear him through the glass.Well before he could read or write, David Pokora mastered the intricacies of first-person shooters. There is a grainy video of him playing Blake Stone: Aliens of Gold in 1995, his 3-year-old fingers nimbly dancing around the keyboard of his parents’ off-brand PC. What captivated him about the game was not its violence but rather the seeming magic of its controls; he wondered how a boxy beige machine could convert his physical actions into onscreen motion. The kid was a born programmer.Pokora dabbled in coding throughout elementary school, building tools like basic web browsers. But he became wholly enamored with the craft as a preteen on a family trip to Poland. He had lugged his bulky laptop to the sleepy town where his parents’ relatives lived. There was little else to do, so as chickens roamed the yards he passed the time by teaching himself the Visual Basic .NET programming language. The house where he stayed had no internet access, so Pokora couldn’t Google for help when his programs spit out errors. But he kept chipping away at his code until it was immaculate, a labor-intensive process that filled him with unexpected joy. By the time he got back home, he was hooked on the psychological rewards of bending machines to his will.As Pokora began to immerse himself in programming, his family bought its first Xbox. With its ability to connect to multiplayer sessions on the Xbox Live service and its familiar ­Windows-derived architecture, the machine made Pokora’s Super Nintendo seem like a relic. Whenever he wasn’t splattering aliens in Halo, Pokora scoured the internet for technical information about his new favorite plaything. His wanderings brought him into contact with a community of hackers who were redefining what the Xbox could do.To divine its secrets, these hackers had cracked open the console’s case and eavesdropped on the data that zipped between the motherboard’s various components—the CPU, the RAM, the Flash chip. This led to the discovery of what the cryptography expert Bruce Schneier termed “lots of kindergarten security mistakes.” For example, Microsoft had left the decryption key for the machine’s boot code lying around in an accessible area of the machine’s memory. When an MIT graduate student named Bunnie Huang located that key in 2002, he gave his hacker compatriots the power to trick the Xbox into booting up homebrew programs that could stream music, run Linux, or emulate Segas and Nintendos. All they had to do first was tweak their consoles’ firmware, either by soldering a so-called modchip onto the motherboard or loading a hacked game-save file from a USB drive.Once Pokora hacked his family’s Xbox, he got heavy into tinkering with his cherished Halo. He haunted IRC channels and web forums where the best Halo programmers hung out, poring over tutorials on how to alter the physics of the game. He was soon making a name for himself by writing Halo 2 utilities that allowed players to fill any of the game’s landscapes with digitized water or change blue skies into rain.The hacking free-for-all ended with the release of the second-generation Xbox, the Xbox 360, in November 2005. The 360 had none of the glaring security flaws of its predecessor, to the chagrin of programmers like the 13-year-old Pokora who could no longer run code that hadn’t been approved by Microsoft. There was one potential workaround for frustrated hackers, but it required a rare piece of hardware: an Xbox 360 development kit.Dev kits are the machines that Microsoft-approved developers use to write Xbox content. To the untrained eye they look like ordinary consoles, but the units contain most of the software integral to the game development process, including tools for line-by-line debugging. A hacker with a dev kit can manipulate Xbox software just like an authorized programmer.Microsoft sends dev kits only to rigorously screened game-development companies. In the mid-2000s a few kits would occasionally become available when a bankrupt developer dumped its assets in haste, but for the most part the hardware was seldom spotted in the wild. There was one hacker, however, who lucked into a mother lode of 360 dev kits and whose eagerness to profit off his good fortune would help Pokora ascend to the top of the Xbox scene.Meet the cast of characters behind the Xbox Underground.Gifted Canadian hacker and the brains of the Xbox Underground.Programmer who made millions by tricking FIFA Soccer into minting virtual coins.Australian teenage hacker who turned reckless as the FBI closed in.Pokora's friend in Delaware, arrested in 2010 for trying to steal a game's source code.Abruptly vanished from the Xbox hacking scene, causing widespread paranoia.Owner of a hacked modem that he used to help the Xbox Underground steal software.In 2006, while working as a Wells Fargo technology manager in Walnut Creek, California, 38-year-old Rowdy Van Cleave learned that a nearby recycling facility was selling Xbox DVD drives cheap. When he went to inspect the merchandise, the facility’s owners mentioned they received regular deliveries of surplus Microsoft hardware. Van Cleave, who’d been part of a revered Xbox-hacking crew called Team Avalaunch, volunteered to poke around the recyclers’ warehouse and point out any Xbox junk that might have resale value.After sifting through mountains of Xbox flotsam and jetsam, Van Cleave talked the recyclers into letting him take home five motherboards. When he jacked one of them into his Xbox 360 and booted it up, the screen gave him the option to activate debugging mode. “Holy shit,” Van Cleave thought, “this is a frickin’ dev motherboard!”Aware that he had stumbled on the Xbox scene’s equivalent of King Tut’s tomb, Van Cleave cut a deal with the recyclers that let him buy whatever discarded Xbox hardware came their way. Some of these treasures he kept for his own sizable collection or handed out to friends; he once gave another Team Avalaunch member a dev kit as a wedding present. But Van Cleave was always on the lookout for paying customers he could trust to be discreet.The 16-year-old Pokora became one of those customers in 2008, shortly after meeting Van Cleave through an online friend and impressing him with his technical prowess. In addition to buying kits for himself, Pokora acted as a salesman for Van Cleave, peddling hardware at significant markup to other Halo hackers; he charged around $1,000 per kit, though desperate souls sometimes ponied up as much as $3,000. (Van Cleave denies that Pokora sold kits on his behalf.) He befriended several of his customers, including a guy named Justin May who lived in Wilmington, Delaware.Now flush with dev kits, Pokora was able to start modifying the recently released Halo 3. He kept vampire hours as he hacked, coding in a trancelike state that he termed “hyperfocus” until he dropped from exhaustion at around 3 or 4 am. He was often late for school, but he shrugged off his slumping grades; he considered programming on his dev kit to be the only education that mattered.Pokora posted snippets of his Halo 3 work on forums like Halomods.com, which is how he came to the attention of a hacker in Whittier, California, named Anthony Clark. The 18-year-old Clark had experience disassembling Xbox games—reverse-engineering their code from machine language into a programming language. He reached out to Pokora and proposed that they join forces on some projects.Clark and Pokora grew close, talking nearly every day about programming as well as music, cars, and other adolescent fixations. Pokora sold Clark a dev kit so they could hack Halo 3 in tandem; Clark, in turn, gave Pokora tips on the art of the disassembly. They ­cowrote a Halo 3 tool that let them endow the protagonist, Master Chief, with special skills—like the ability to jump into the clouds or fire weird projectiles. And they logged countless hours playing their hacked creations on PartnerNet, a sandbox version of Xbox Live available only to dev kit owners.As they released bits and pieces of their software online, Pokora and Clark began to hear from engineers at Microsoft and Bungie, the developer behind the Halo series. The professional programmers offered nothing but praise, despite knowing that Pokora and Clark were using ill-gotten dev kits. Cool, you did a good job of reverse-engineering this, they’d tell Pokora. The encouraging feedback convinced him that he was on an unorthodox path to a career in game development—perhaps the only path available to a construction worker’s son from Mississauga who was no classroom star.But Pokora and Clark occasionally flirted with darker hijinks. By 2009 the pair was using PartnerNet not only to play their modded versions of Halo 3 but also to swipe unreleased software that was still being tested. There was one Halo 3 map that Pokora snapped a picture of and then shared too liberally with friends; the screenshot wound up getting passed around among Halo fans. When Pokora and Clark next returned to PartnerNet to play Halo 3, they encountered a message on the game’s main screen that Bungie engineers had expressly left for them: “Winners Don’t Break Into PartnerNet.”The two hackers laughed off the warning. They considered their mischief all in good fun—they’d steal a beta here and there, but only because they loved the Xbox so much, not to enrich themselves. They saw no reason to stop playing cat and mouse with the Xbox pros, whom they hoped to call coworkers some day.The Xbox 360 remained largely invulnerable until late 2009, when security researchers finally identified a weakness: By affixing a modchip to an arcane set of motherboard pins used for quality-assurance testing, they managed to nullify the 360’s defenses. The hack came to be known as the JTAG, after the Joint Test Action Group, the industry body that had recommended adding the pins to all printed circuit boards in the mid-1980s.When news of the vulnerability broke, Xbox 360 owners rushed to get their consoles JTAGed by services that materialized overnight. With 23 million subscribers now on Xbox Live, multi­player gaming had become vastly more competitive, and a throng of gamers whom Pokora dubbed “spoiled kids with their parents’ credit cards” were willing to go to extraordinary lengths to humiliate their rivals.For Pokora and Clark, it was an opportunity to cash in. They hacked the Call of Duty series of military-themed shooters to create so-called modded lobbies—places on Xbox Live where Call of Duty players could join games governed by reality-bending rules. For fees that ranged up to $100 per half-hour, players with JTAGed consoles could participate in death matches while wielding superpowers: They could fly, walk through walls, sprint with Flash-like speed, or shoot bullets that never missed their targets.For an extra $50 to $150, Pokora and Clark also offered “infections”—powers that players’ characters would retain when they joined nonhacked games. Pokora was initially reluctant to sell infections: He knew his turbocharged clients would slaughter their hapless opponents, a situation that struck him as contrary to the spirit of gaming. But then the money started rolling in—as much as $8,000 on busy days. There were so many customers that he and Clark had to hire employees to deal with the madness. Swept up in the excitement of becoming an entrepreneur, Pokora forgot all about his commitment to fairness. It was one more step down a ladder he barely noticed he was descending.Microsoft tried to squelch breaches like the Call of Duty cheats by launching an automated system that could detect JTAGed consoles and ban them. But Pokora reverse-engineered the system and devised a way to beat it: He wrote a program that hijacked Xbox Live’s security queries to an area of the console where they could be filled with false data, and thus be duped into certifying a hacked console.Pokora reveled in the perks of his success. He still lived with his parents, but he paid his tuition as he entered the University of Toronto in the fall of 2010. He and his girlfriend dined at upscale restaurants every night and stayed at $400-a-night hotels as they traveled around Canada for metal shows. But he wasn’t really in it for the money or even the adulation of his peers; what he most coveted was the sense of glee and power he derived from making $60 million games behave however he wished.Pokora knew there was a whiff of the illegal about his Call of Duty business, which violated numerous copyrights. But he interpreted the lack of meaningful pushback from either Microsoft or Activision, Call of Duty’s developer, as a sign that the companies would tolerate his enterprise, much as Bungie had put up with his Halo 3 shenanigans. Activision did send a series of cease-and-desist letters, but the company never followed through on its threats.“I mean, it’s just videogames,” Pokora told himself whenever another Activision letter arrived. “It’s not like we’re hacking into a server or stealing anyone’s information.” That would come soon enough.Dylan Wheeler, a hacker in Perth, Australia, whose alias was SuperDaE, knew that something juicy had fallen into his lap. An American friend of his who went by the name Gamerfreak had slipped him a password list for the public forums operated by Epic Games, a Cary, North Carolina, game developer known for its Unreal and Gears of War series. In 2010 Wheeler started poking around the forums’ accounts to see if any of them belonged to Epic employees. He eventually identified a member of the company’s IT department whose employee email address and password appeared on Gamerfreak’s list; rummaging through the man’s personal emails, Wheeler found a password for an internal EpicGames.com account.Once he had a toehold at Epic, Wheeler wanted a talented partner to help him sally deeper into the network. “Who is big enough to be interested in something like this?” he wondered. Xenomega—David Pokora—whom he’d long admired from afar and was eager to befriend, was the first name that popped to mind. Wheeler cold-messaged the Canadian and offered him the chance to get inside one of the world’s preeminent game developers; he didn’t mention that he was only 14, fearing that his age would be a deal breaker.What Wheeler was proposing was substantially shadier than anything Pokora had attempted before: It was one thing to download Halo maps from the semipublic PartnerNet and quite another to break into a fortified private network where a company stores its most sensitive data. But Pokora was overwhelmed by curiosity about what software he might unearth on Epic’s servers and titillated by the prospect of reverse-engineering a trove of top-secret games. And so he rationalized what he was about to do by setting ground rules—he wouldn’t take any credit card numbers, for example, nor peek at personal information about Epic’s customers.Pokora and Wheeler combed through Epic’s network by masquerading as the IT worker whose login credentials Wheeler had compromised. They located a plugged-in USB drive that held all of the company’s passwords, including one that gave them root access to the entire network. Then they pried into the computers of Epic bigwigs such as design director Cliff “CliffyB” Bleszinski; the pair chortled when they opened a music folder that Bleszinski had made for his Lamborghini and saw that it contained lots of Katy Perry and Miley Cyrus tunes. (Bleszinski, who left Epic in 2012, confirms the hackers’ account, adding that he’s “always been public and forthright about my taste for bubblegum pop.”)To exfiltrate Epic’s data, Wheeler enlisted the help of Sanadodeh “Sonic” Nesheiwat, a New Jersey gamer who possessed a hacked cable modem that could obfuscate its location. In June 2011 Nesheiwat downloaded a prerelease copy of Gears of War 3 from Epic, along with hundreds of gigabytes of other software. He burned Epic’s source code onto eight Blu-ray discs that he shipped to Pokora in a package marked wedding videos. Pokora shared the game with several friends, including his dev kit customer Justin May; within days a copy showed up on the Pirate Bay, a notorious BitTorrent site.The Gears of War 3 leak triggered a federal investigation, and Epic began working with the FBI to determine how its security had been breached. Pokora and Wheeler found out about the nascent probe while reading Epic’s emails; they freaked out when one of those emails described a meeting between the company’s brain trust and FBI agents. “I need your help—I’m going to get arrested,” a panicked Pokora wrote to May that July. “I need to encrypt some hard drives.”But the email chatter between Epic and the FBI quickly died down, and the company made no apparent effort to block the hackers’ root access to the network—a sign that it couldn’t pinpoint their means of entry. Having survived their first brush with the law, the hackers felt emboldened—the brazen Wheeler most of all. He kept trespassing on sensitive areas of Epic’s network, making few efforts to conceal his IP address as he spied on high-level corporate meetings through webcams he’d commandeered. “He knowingly logs into Epic knowing that the feds chill there,” Nesheiwat told Pokora about their Australian partner. “They were emailing FBI people, but he still manages to not care.”Owning Epic’s network gave the hackers entrée to a slew of other organizations. Pokora and Wheeler came across login credentials for Scaleform, a so-called middleware company that provided technology for the engine at the heart of Epic’s games. Once they’d broken into Scaleform, they discovered that the company’s network was full of credentials for Silicon Valley titans, Hollywood entertainment conglomerates, and Zombie Studios, the developer of the Spec Ops series of games. On Zombie’s network they uncovered remote-access “tunnels” to its clients, including branches of the American military. Wriggling through those poorly secured tunnels was no great challenge, though Pokora was wary of leaving behind too many digital tracks. “If they notice any of this,” he told the group, “they’re going to come looking for me.”As the scale of their enterprise increased, the hackers discussed what they should do if the FBI came knocking. High off the feeling of omni­potence that came from burrowing into supposedly impregnable networks, Pokora proposed releasing all of Epic’s proprietary data as an act of revenge: “If we ever go disappearing, just, you know, upload it to the internet and say fuck you Epic.”The group also cracked jokes about what they should call their prison gang. Everyone dug Wheeler’s tongue-in-cheek suggestion that they could strike fear into other inmates’ hearts by dubbing themselves the Xbox Underground.Pokora was becoming ever more infatuated with his forays into corporate networks, and his old friends from the Xbox scene feared for his future. Kevin Skitzo, a Team Avalaunch hacker, urged him to pull back from the abyss. “Dude, just stop this shit,” he implored Pokora. “Focus on school, because this shit? I mean, I get it—it’s a high. But as technology progresses and law enforcement gets more aware, you can only dodge that bullet for so long.”But Pokora was too caught up in the thrill of stockpiling forbidden software to heed this advice. In September 2011 he stole a prerelease copy of Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3. “Let’s get arrested,” he quipped to his friends as he started the download.Though he was turning cocky as he swung from network to network without consequence, Pokora still took pride in how little he cared about money. After seizing a database that contained “a fuckton of PayPals,” Pokora sang his own praises to his associates for resisting the temptation to profit off the accounts. “We could already have sold them for Bitcoins which would have been untraceable if we did it right. It could have already been easily an easy fifty grand.”But with each passing week, Pokora became a little bit more mercenary. In November 2011, for example, he asked his friend May to broker a deal with a gamer who went by Xboxdevguy, who’d expressed an interest in buying prerelease games. Pokora was willing to deliver any titles Xboxdevguy desired for a few hundred dollars each.Pokora’s close relationship with May made his hacker cohorts uneasy. They knew that May had been arrested at a Boston gaming convention in March 2010 for trying to download the source code for the first-person shooter Breach. A spokesperson for the game’s developer told the tech blog Engadget that, upon being caught after a brief foot chase, May had said he “could give us bigger and more important people and he could ‘name names.’” But Pokora trusted May because he’d watched him participate in many crooked endeavors; he couldn’t imagine that anyone in cahoots with law enforcement would be allowed to do so much dirt.By the spring of 2012, Pokora and Wheeler were focused on pillaging the network of Zombie Studios. Their crew now included two new faces from the scene: Austin “AAmonkey” Alcala, an Indiana high school kid, and Nathan “animefre4k” Leroux, the home­schooled son of a diesel mechanic from Bowie, Maryland. Leroux, in particular, was an exceptional talent: He’d cowritten a program that could trick Electronic Arts’ soccer game FIFA 2012 into minting the virtual coins that players get for completing matches, and which are used to buy character upgrades.While navigating through Zombie’s network, the group stumbled on a tunnel to a US Army server; it contained a simulator for the AH-64D Apache helicopter that Zombie was developing on a Pentagon contract. Ever the wild man, Wheeler downloaded the software and told his colleagues they should “sell the simulators to the Arabs.”The hackers were also busy tormenting Microsoft, stealing documents that contained specs for an early version of the Durango, the codename for the next-generation Xbox—a machine that would come to be known as the Xbox One. Rather than sell the documents to a Microsoft competitor, the hackers opted for a more byzantine scheme: They would counterfeit and sell a Durango themselves, using off-the-shelf components. Leroux volunteered to do the assembly in exchange for a cut of the proceeds; he needed money to pay for online computer science classes at the University of Maryland.The hackers put out feelers around the scene and found a buyer in the Seychelles who was willing to pay $5,000 for the counterfeit console. May picked up the completed machine from Leroux’s house and promised to ship it to the archipelago in the Indian Ocean.But the Durango never arrived at its destination. When the buyer complained, paranoia set in: Had the FBI intercepted the shipment? Were they now all under surveillance?Wheeler was especially unsettled: He’d thought the crew was untouchable after the Epic investigation appeared to stall, but now he felt certain that everyone was about to get hammered by a racketeering case. “How do we end this game?” he asked himself. The answer he came up with was to go down in a blaze of glory, to do things that would ensure his place in Xbox lore.Wheeler launched his campaign for notoriety by posting a Durango for sale on eBay, using photographs of the one that Leroux had built. The bidding for the nonexistent machine reached $20,100 before eBay canceled the auction, declaring it fraudulent. Infuriated by the media attention the saga generated, Pokora cut off contact with Wheeler.A few weeks later, Leroux vanished from the scene; rumors swirled that he’d been raided by the FBI. Americans close to Pokora began to tell him they were being tailed by black cars with tinted windows. The hackers suspected there might be an informant in their midst.The relationship between Pokora and Clark soured as Pokora got deeper into hacking developers. The two finally fell out over staffing issues at their Call of Duty business—for example, they hired some workers whom Pokora considered greedy, but Clark refused to call them out. Sick of dealing with such friction, both men drifted into other ventures. Pokora focused on Horizon, an Xbox cheating service that he built on the side with some friends; he liked that Horizon’s cheats couldn’t be used on Xbox Live, which meant fewer potential technical and legal headaches. Clark, meanwhile, refined Leroux’s FIFA coin-minting technology and started selling the virtual currency on the black market. Austin Alcala, who’d participated in the hack of Zombie Studios and the Xbox One counterfeiting caper, worked for Clark’s new venture.As the now 20-year-old Pokora split his energies between helping to run Horizon and attending university, Wheeler continued his kamikaze quest for attention. In the wake of his eBay stunt, Microsoft sent a private investigator named Miles Hawkes to Perth to confront him. Wheeler posted on Twitter about meeting “Mr. Microsoft Man,” who pressed him for information about his collaborators over lunch at the Hyatt. According to Wheeler, Hawkes told him not to worry about any legal repercussions, as Microsoft was only interested in going after “real assholes.” (Micro­soft denies that Hawkes said this.)In December 2012 the FBI raided Sanadodeh Nesheiwat’s home in New Jersey. Nesheiwat posted an unredacted version of the search warrant online. Wheeler reacted by doxing the agents in a public forum and encouraging people to harass them; he also spoke openly about hiring a hitman to murder the federal judge who’d signed the warrant.Wheeler’s bizarre compulsion to escalate every situation alarmed federal prosecutors, who’d been carefully building a case against the hackers since the Gears of War leak in June 2011. Edward McAndrew, the assistant US attorney who was leading the investigation, felt he needed to accelerate the pace of his team’s work before Wheeler sparked real violence.On the morning of February 19, 2013, Wheeler was working in his family’s home in Perth when he noticed a commotion in the yard below his window. A phalanx of men in light tactical gear was approaching the house, Glocks holstered by their sides. Wheeler scrambled to shut down all of his computers, so that whoever would be dissecting his hardware would at least have to crack his passwords.Over the next few hours, Australian police carted away what Wheeler estimated to be more than $20,000 worth of computer equipment; Wheeler was miffed that no one bothered to place his precious hard drives in antistatic bags. He wasn’t jailed that day, but his hard drives yielded a bounty of incriminating evidence: Wheeler had taken frequent screenshots of his hacking exploits, such as a chat in which he proposed running “some crazy program to fuck the fans up” on Zombie Studios’ servers.That July, Pokora told Justin May he was about to attend Defcon, the annual hacker gathering in Las Vegas—his first trip across the border in years. On July 23, ­McAndrew and his colleagues filed a sealed 16-count indictment against Pokora, Nesheiwat, and ­Leroux, charging them with crimes including wire fraud, identify theft, and conspiracy to steal trade secrets; Wheeler and Gamerfreak, the original source of the Epic password list, were named as unindicted coconspirators. (Alcala would be added as a defendant four months later.) The document revealed that much of the government’s case was built on evidence supplied by an informant referred to as Person A. He was described as a Delaware resident who had picked up the counterfeit Durango from Leroux’s house, then handed it over to the FBI.Prosecutors also characterized the defendants as members of the “Xbox Underground.” Wheeler’s prison-gang joke was a joke no longer.The hackers cracked jokes about what they should call their prison gang. Everyone dug Wheeler's tongue-in-cheek suggestion that they could strike fear into the hearts of other inmates by dubbing themselves the Xbox Underground.Though he knew nothing about the secret indictment, Pokora was too busy to go to Defcon and pulled out at the last minute. The FBI worried that arresting his American coconspirators would spur him to go on the lam, so the agency decided to wait for him to journey south before rolling up the crew.Two months later, Pokora went to the Toronto Opera House for a show by the Swedish metal band Katatonia. His phone buzzed as a warm-up act was tearing through a song—it was Alcala, now a high school senior in Fishers, Indiana. He was tittering with excitement: He said he knew a guy who could get them both the latest Durango prototypes—real ones, not counterfeits like the machine they’d made the summer before. His connection was willing to break into a building on Microsoft’s Redmond campus to steal them. In exchange, the burglar was demanding login credentials for Microsoft’s game developer network plus a few thousand dollars. Pokora was baffled by the aspiring burglar’s audacity. “This guy’s stupid,” he thought. But after years of pushing his luck, Pokora was no longer in the habit of listening to his own common sense. He told Alcala to put them in touch.The burglar was a recent high school graduate named Arman, known on the scene as ArmanTheCyber. (He agreed to share his story on the condition that his last name not be used.) A year earlier he’d cloned a Microsoft employee badge that belonged to his mother’s boyfriend; he’d been using the RFID card to explore the Redmond campus ever since, passing as an employee by dressing head to toe in Microsoft swag. (Microsoft claims he didn’t copy the badge but rather stole it.) The 18-year-old had already stolen one Durango for personal use; he was nervous about going back for more but also brimming with the recklessness of youth.Around 9 pm on a late September night, Arman swiped himself into the building that housed the Durangos. A few engineers were still roaming the hallways; Arman dove into a cubicle and hid whenever he heard footsteps. He eventually climbed the stairs to the fifth floor, where he’d heard there was a cache of Durangos. As he started to make his way into the darkened floor, motion detectors sensed his presence and light flooded the room. Spooked, Arman bolted back downstairs.He finally found what he was looking for in two third-floor cubicles. One of the Durangos had a pair of stiletto heels atop the case; Arman put the two consoles in his oversize backpack and left the fancy shoes on the carpet.A week after he sent the stolen Durangos to Pokora and Alcala, Arman received some surprising news: A Microsoft vendor had finally reviewed an employment application he’d submitted that summer and hired him as a quality-­assurance tester. He lasted only a couple weeks on the job before investigators identified him as the Durango thief; a stairwell camera had caught him leaving the building. To minimize the legal fallout, he begged Pokora and Alcala to send back the stolen consoles. He also returned the Durango he’d taken for himself, and not a moment too soon: Jealous hackers had been scoping out his house online, as a prelude to executing a robbery.Pokora spent all winter hacking the Xbox 360’s games for Horizon. But as Toronto was beginning to thaw out in March 2014, he figured he could spare a weekend to drive down to Delaware and pick up the bumper he’d ordered for his Volkswagen Golf.“Y’know, there’s a chance I could get arrested,” he told his dad as they prepared to leave. His father had no idea what he was talking about and cracked a thin smile at what was surely a bad joke.After an initial appearance at the federal courthouse in Buffalo and a few days in a nearby county jail, Pokora was loaded into a van alongside another federal inmate, a gang member with a powerlifter’s arms and no discernible neck. They were being transported to a private prison in Ohio, where Pokora would be held until the court in Delaware was ready to start its proceedings against him. For kicks, he says, the guards tossed the prisoners’ sandwiches onto the floor of the van, knowing that the tightly shackled men couldn’t reach them.During the three-hour journey, the gang member, who was serving time for beating a man with a hammer, counseled Pokora to do whatever was necessary to minimize his time behind bars. “This life ain’t for you,” he said. “This life ain’t for nobody, really.”Pokora took those words to heart when he was finally brought to Delaware in early April 2014. He quickly accepted the plea deal that was offered, and he helped the victimized companies identify the vulnerabilities he’d exploited—for example, the lightly protected tunnels that let him hopscotch among networks. As he sat in rooms and listened to Pokora explain his hacks with professorial flair, McAndrew, the lead prosecutor, took a shine to the now 22-year-old Canadian. “He’s a very talented kid who started down a bad path,” he says. “A lot of times when you’re investigating these things, you have to have a certain level of admiration for the brilliance and creativity of the work. But then you kind of step back and say, ‘Here’s where it went wrong.’”One day, on the way from jail to court, Pokora was placed in a marshal’s vehicle with someone who looked familiar—a pale 20-year-old guy with a wispy build and teeth marred by a Skittles habit. It was Nathan Leroux, whom Pokora had never met in person but recognized from a photo. He had been arrested on March 31 in Madison, Wisconsin, where he’d moved after the FBI raid that had scared him into dropping out of the Xbox scene. He’d been flourishing in his new life as a programmer at Human Head Studios, a small game developer, when the feds showed up to take him into custody.As he and Leroux rode to court in shackles, Pokora tried to pass along the gang member’s advice. “Look, a lot of this was escalated because of DaE—DaE’s an asshole,” he said, using the shorthand of Wheeler’s nickname, SuperDaE. “You can rat on me or do whatever, because you don’t deserve this shit. Let’s just do what we got to do and get out of here.”Unlike Pokora, Leroux was granted bail and was allowed to live with his parents as his case progressed. But as he lingered at his Maryland home, he grew convinced that, given his diminutive stature and shy nature, he was doomed to be raped or murdered if he went to prison. His fear became so overpowering that, on June 16, he clipped off his ankle monitor and fled.He paid a friend to try to smuggle him into Canada, nearly 400 miles to the north. But their long drive ended in futility: The Canadians flagged the car at the border. Rather than accept that his escape had failed, Leroux pulled out a knife and tried to sprint across the bridge onto Canadian soil. When officers surrounded him, he decided he had just one option left: He stabbed himself multiple times. Doctors at an Ontario hospital managed to save his life. Once he was released from intensive care and transported back to Buffalo, his bail was revoked.When it came time for Pokora’s sentencing, his attorney argued for leniency by contending that his client had lost the ability to differentiate play from crime. “David in the real world was something else entirely from David online,” he wrote in his sentencing memorandum. “But it was in this tenebrous world of anonymity, frontier rules, and private communication set at a remove from everyday life that David was incrementally desensitized to an online culture in which the line between playing a videogame and hacking into a computer network narrowed to the vanishing point.”After pleading guilty, Pokora, Leroux, and Nesheiwat ultimately received similar punishments: 18 months in prison for Pokora and Nesheiwat, 24 months for Leroux. Pokora did the majority of his time at the Federal Detention Center in Philadelphia, where he made use of the computer room to send emails or listen to MP3s. Once, while waiting for a terminal to open up, a mentally unstable inmate got in his face, and Pokora defended himself so he wouldn’t appear weak; the brawl ended when a guard blasted him with pepper spray. After finishing his prison sentence, Pokora spent several more months awaiting deportation to Canada in an immigration detention facility in Newark, New Jersey. That jail had PCs in the law library, and Pokora got to use his hacker skills to find and play a hidden version of Microsoft Solitaire.Yes, Even Elite Hackers Make Dumb MistakesDOJ Indicts 9 Iranians For Brazen Cyberattacks Against 144 US UniversitiesHow Creative DDOS Attacks Still Slip Past DefensesWhen he finally returned to Mississauga in October 2015, Pokora texted his old friend Anthony Clark, who was now facing a legal predicament of his own. Alcala had told the government all about Clark’s FIFA coin-minting operation. The enterprise had already been on the IRS’s radar: One of Clark’s workers had come under suspicion for withdrawing as much as $30,000 a day from a Dallas bank account. Alcala connected the dots for the feds, explaining to them that the business could fool Electronic Arts’ servers into spitting out thousands of coins per second: The group’s code automated and accelerated FIFA’s gameplay, so that more than 11,500 matches could be completed in the time it took a human to finish just one. The information he provided led to the indictment of Clark and three others for wire fraud; they had allegedly grossed $16 million by selling the FIFA coins, primarily to a Chinese businessman they knew only as Tao.Though Clark’s three codefendants had all pleaded guilty, he was intent on going to trial. He felt that he had done nothing wrong, especially since Electronic Arts’ terms of service state that its FIFA coins have no real value. Besides, if Electronic Arts executives were really upset about his operation, why didn’t they reach out to discuss the matter like adults? Perhaps Electronic Arts was just jealous that he—not they—had figured out how to generate revenue from in-game currencies.“Yeah, I’m facing 8+ years,” Clark wrote in a text to Pokora. “And if I take the plea 3½. Either way fuck them. They keep trying to get me to plea.”“They roof you if you fail at trial,” Pokora warned. “My only concern is to educate you a bit about what it will be like. Because it’s a shitty thing to go through.” But Clark wouldn’t be swayed—he was a man of principle.That Fourth of July, Pokora wrote to Clark again. He jokingly asked why Clark hadn’t yet sent him a custom video that he’d requested: Clark and his Mexican-American relatives dancing to salsa music beneath a Donald Trump piñata. “Where’s the salsa?” Pokora asked.The reply came back: “On my chips,” followed by the smiling-face-with-sunglasses emoji. It was the last time Pokora ever heard from his Halo 3 comrade.Clark’s trial in federal district court in Fort Worth that November did not go as he had hoped: He was convicted on one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud. His attorneys thought he had excellent grounds for appeal, since they believed that the prosecution had failed to prove the FIFA coin business had caused Electronic Arts any actual harm.But Clark’s legal team never got the chance to make that case. On February 26, 2017, about a month before he was scheduled to be sentenced, Clark died in his Whittier home. People close to his family insist that the death was accidental, the result of a lethal interaction between alcohol and medication. Clark had just turned 27 and left behind an estate valued at more than $4 million.The members of the Xbox Underground have readjusted to civilian life with varying degrees of success. In exchange for his coopera­tion, Alcala received no prison time; he enrolled at Ball State University and made the dean’s list. The 20-year-old brought his girlfriend to his April 2016 sentencing hearing—“my first real girlfriend”—and spoke about a talk he’d given at an FBI conference on infrastructure protection. “The world is your oyster,” the judge told him.Leroux’s coworkers at Human Head Studios sent letters to the court on his behalf, commending his intelligence and kindness. “He has a very promising game development career ahead of him, and I wouldn’t think he’d ever again risk throwing that away,” one supporter wrote. On his release from prison, Leroux returned to Madison to rejoin the company.Nesheiwat, who was 28 at the time of his arrest, did not fare as well as his younger colleagues. He struggled with addiction and was ­rearrested last December for violating his probation by using cocaine and opiates; his probation officer said he’d “admitted to doing up to 50 bags of heroin per day” before his most recent stint in rehab.Because Wheeler had been a juvenile when most of the hacking occurred, the US decided to leave his prosecution to the Australian authorities. After being given 48 hours to turn in his passport, Wheeler drove straight to the airport and absconded to the Czech Republic, his mother’s native land. The Australians imprisoned his mother for aiding his escape, presumably to pressure him into returning home to face justice. (She has since been released.) But Wheeler elected to remain a fugitive, drifting through Europe on an EU passport before eventually settling in the UK. During his travels he tried to crowdfund the purchase of a $500,000 Ferrari, explaining that his doctor said he needed the car to cope with the anxiety caused by his legal travails. (The campaign did not succeed.)"I never meant for it to get as bad as it did," Pokora says.Pokora, who is now 26, was disoriented during his first months back in Canada. He feared that his brain had permanently rotted in prison, a place where intellectual stimulation is in short supply. But he reunited with his girlfriend, whom he’d begged to leave him while he was behind bars, and he reenrolled at the University of Toronto. He scraped together the tuition by taking on freelance projects programming user-interface automation tools; his financial struggles made him nostalgic for the days when he was rolling in Call of Duty cash.When he learned of Clark’s death, Pokora briefly felt renewed bitterness toward Alcala, who’d been instrumental to the government’s case against his friend. But he let the anger pass. There was nothing to be gained by holding a grudge against his onetime fellow travelers. He couldn’t even work up much resentment against Justin May, whom he and many others are certain was the Delaware-based FBI informant identified as Person A in the Xbox Underground indictment. (“Can’t comment on that, sorry,” May responded when asked whether he was Person A. He is currently being prosecuted in the federal district of eastern Pennsylvania for defrauding Cisco and Microsoft out of millions of dollars’ worth of hardware.)Pokora still struggles to understand how his love for programming warped into an obsession that knocked his moral compass so far askew. “As much as I consciously made the decisions I did, I never meant for it to get as bad as it did,” he says. “I mean, I wanted access to companies to read some source code, I wanted to learn, I wanted to see how far it could go—that was it. It was really just intellectual curiosity. I didn’t want money—if I wanted money, I would’ve taken all the money that was there. But, I mean, I get it—what it turned into, it’s regrettable.”Pokora knows he’ll forever be persona non grata in the gaming industry, so he’s been looking elsewhere for full-time employment since finishing the classwork for his computer science degree last June. But he’s had a tough time putting together a portfolio of his best work: At the behest of the FBI, Canadian authorities seized all of the computers he’d owned prior to his arrest, and most of the software he’d created during his Xbox heyday was lost forever. They did let him keep his 2013 Volkswagen Golf, however, the car he adores so much that he was willing to drive to Delaware for a bumper. He keeps it parked at his parents’ house in Mississauga, the place where he played his first game at the age of 2, and where he’s lived ever since leaving prison.Contributing editor Brendan I. Koerner (@brendan­koerner) wrote about silicon theft in issue 25.10.This article appears in the May issue. Subscribe now.Listen to this story, and other WIRED features, on the Audm app.Game developers Greg Kasavin of Supergiant Games and Mike Mika of Other Ocean Interactive share the top games they'd most like to hack. Whether for social change or pure fun, see what classic titles each of these game aficionados would most love to change and why.CNMN Collection© 2018 Condé Nast. All rights reserved.Use of and/or registration on any portion of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated 5/25/18) and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated 5/25/18). Your California Privacy Rights. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices.
Forgot password?Don't have an account? Sign up nowLiam Tung (CSO Online) on 18 July, 2018 20:55The FBI’s IC3 unit is warning that email swindling scams, known as business email compromise, have now conned businesses and individuals to wire $12.5 billion to scammer accounts in the last five years. According to IC3, the value of reported losses to BEC scams have more than doubled between December 2016 and May 2018 and they’re happening to victims in all 50 states in the US and in 150 countries.Now IC3 is calling BEC — where fraudster’s study a target and compromise email accounts of CEOs or finance administrators to orchestrate misdirected transfers— a”12 billion dollar scam” . That’s still smaller than Symantec's 2017 estimate of the cost of cybercrime to consumers of $172 billion.    The new figures nonetheless mark a massive increase IC3’s November 2017 BEC update where it reported total worldwide “exposed losses” at $5.3 billion and 40,203 victims in the US and abroad. Exposed losses include actual and attempted scams in the US, so actual losses may be smaller assuming all instances of BEC fraud are known to the FBI. “Last week’s FBI announcement that business email compromise attacks have resulted in more than $12.5 billion in losses worldwide shines a necessary light on the real-world financial impact that email fraud and account compromise can have on organizations,” Tim Bentley, vice president of Proofpoint APJ, told CSO Online.Bentley said that many BEC incidents are underreported or unreported each year.   “These new figures compound our recent research findings that email fraud attacks hit more than 90% of organizations in the first three months of this year and the total number rose 103% year-over-year,” he said,Exposed losses is based on BEC complaints to law enforcement and reports from financial institutions made between October 2013 and May 2018. Domestic and international complaints about BEC have climbed to 78,617Losses reported directly from victims of BEC fraud were significantly less, but represent a massive windfall for BEC perpetrators. Between June 2016 to May 2018 victims reported to IC3 that BEC fraudsters conned them into sending $1.6 billion to 19,335 accounts. There were also 11,452 fraudsters outside the US who received $1.7 billion. Some of those fraudsters were arrested in June following a six month investigation by the FBI, which netted 42 alleged BEC fraudsters in the US, 29 in Nigeria, and three in Canada, Mauritius and Poland. BEC scammers have shown a preference for real estate businesses, which may be due to the large sums involving multiple parties, including the real estate agents, lawyers, title companies and buyers and sellers. The scam against real estate parties is simple. After compromising one of the parties’ email accounts, the victim receives an email request to transfer the money to fraudster’s account, often in the US but primarily to accounts at Chinese and Kong Kong banks. The fraudster quickly withdraws the money from ATMs after receiving funds to a US account, and then shuts the account to frustrate investigations.    US-based money mules are often recruited to participate in real estate BEC fraud by opening their own accounts for receiving BEC funds. Surprisingly, they’re often recruited through romance scams. BEC scams targeting the real estate sector are on the rise. "From calendar year 2015 to calendar year 2017, there was over an 1100% rise in the number of BEC/EAC victims reporting the real estate transaction angle and an almost 2200% rise in the reported monetary loss," said IC3. “BEC attackers prefer the low-tech attack as it's much easier to navigate than hacking into a targeted organization’s infrastructure,” said Bentley.“No matter what an organization’s security architecture looks like, attackers are adept at using two of the most powerful information tools of our era—LinkedIn and Google—to conduct reconnaissance on potential individuals to target. Exploiting the email communication channel through highly personalized, social engineering messages allows them to easily impersonate a trusted employee or partner,” he said.The FBI warned real-estate parties to identify a BEC scam by all parties verifing any request for change in payment type or location, for example changes from check to a wire transfer. It also advises real-estate agents against revealing email address in property listings which could give BEC fraudster vital details to begin the con. One of the largest known Australian instances of BEC affair resulted in Brisbane City Council wiring $450,000 in 9 payments to an account they believed was a supplier. BEC fraud is also a growing threat to Australian business. There were 243 victims of BEC fraud in the first quarter of 2016-2017 Australian financial year, according to the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission (ACIC). Real-estate agents also need to be wary of phone calls from imposters seeking personal information for supposed verification purposes.   “Financial institutions report phone calls acknowledging a change in payment type and/or location. Some victims report they were unable to distinguish the fraudulent phone conversation from legitimate conversations. One way to counter act this fraudulent activity, is to establish code phrases that would only be known to the two legitimate parties, IC3 notes. Sign up to gain exclusive access to email subscriptions, event invitations, competitions, giveaways, and much more.Membership is free, and your security and privacy remain protected. View our privacy policy before signing up.
    Tags fbibusiness email compromise (BEC) attacksbusiness email compCEB

    More about Brisbane City CouncilCSOFBIGoogleProofpointSymantec
​Email fraud is nothing new, but online criminals have become ever more-effective at spoofing their identities to trick employees into sending them money. The Australian Centre for Cyber Security (ACSC) recorded losses of over $20M to business email compromise (BEC) attacks last year alone, up 230 percent over the previous year – and the full amount is certain to be much larger.​Play Video
Cybersecurity Insights - AttackPlay Video
No matter how robust your security, or how diligent your employees, network credentials are a free pass for cybercriminals. This is mostly because employees are relied upon for their own password management. And with more than 4.8 billion sets of stolen credentials said to be available online, odds are that at least a few of your employees’ user IDs and passwords are just waiting to be used by unscrupulous outsiders. Are you ready to stop them?Play Video
Cybersecurity Insights - PeoplePlay Video
Cyber resilience will be particularly important as Australian organisations face increased pressure to quickly detect, respond to, and manage the repercussions of breaches in the wake of 2018’s Notifiable Data Breaches (NDB) scheme.Play Video
Paul ColmerRitesh MehtaMatthew Hackling Matt Tett
Send Us E-mail | 
        Privacy Policy [Updated 16 May 18] | 
        Subscribe to emails |
        Contacts

        Copyright 2018 IDG Communications. ABN 14 001 592 650. All rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without express written permission of IDG Communications is prohibited.
      
        IDG Sites:
        PC World | 
        GoodGearGuide | 
        Computerworld Australia | 
        CIO |
        CMO |
        Techworld | 
        ARN | 
        CIO Executive


WikiLeaks (/ˈwɪkiliːks/) is an international non-profit organisation that publishes secret information, news leaks,[5] and classified media provided by anonymous sources.[6] Its website, initiated in 2006 in Iceland by the organisation Sunshine Press,[7] claims a database of 10 million documents in 10 years since its launch.[8] Julian Assange, an Australian Internet activist, is generally described as its founder and director.[9] Kristinn Hrafnsson is its editor-in-chief.[10]
The group has released a number of prominent document dumps. Early releases included documentation of equipment expenditures and holdings in the Afghanistan war and a report informing a corruption investigation in Kenya.[11] In April 2010, WikiLeaks released the so-called Collateral Murder footage from the 12 July 2007 Baghdad airstrike in which Iraqi journalists were among those killed. Other releases in 2010 included the Afghan War Diary and the "Iraq War Logs". The latter allowed the mapping of 109,032 deaths in "significant" attacks by insurgents in Iraq that had been reported to Multi-National Force – Iraq, including about 15,000 that had not been previously published.[12][13] In 2010, WikiLeaks also released the US State Department diplomatic "cables", classified cables that had been sent to the US State Department. In April 2011, WikiLeaks began publishing 779 secret files relating to prisoners detained in the Guantanamo Bay detention camp.[14]
During the 2016 US presidential election campaign, WikiLeaks released emails and other documents from the Democratic National Committee and from Hillary Clinton's campaign manager, John Podesta.[15] These releases caused significant harm to the Clinton campaign, and have been attributed as a potential contributing factor to her loss.[16] The U.S. intelligence community expressed "high confidence" that the leaked emails had been hacked by Russia and supplied to WikiLeaks, while WikiLeaks denied their source was Russia or any other state.[17] During the campaign, WikiLeaks promoted conspiracy theories about Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party.[18][19][20] In private conversations from November 2015 that were later leaked, Julian Assange expressed a preference for a GOP victory in the 2016 election, explaining that "Dems+Media+liberals woudl [sic] then form a block to reign [sic] in their worst qualities. With Hillary in charge, GOP will be pushing for her worst qualities, dems+media+neoliberals will be mute."[21] In secret correspondence with the Trump campaign on election day (8 November 2016), WikiLeaks encouraged the Trump campaign to contest the election results in case they lost.[22]

WikiLeaks has drawn criticism for its absence of whistleblowing on or criticism of Russia, and for criticising the Panama Papers' exposé of businesses and individuals with offshore bank accounts.[23][24] WikiLeaks has also been criticised for inadequately curating its content and violating the personal privacy of individuals. WikiLeaks has, for instance, revealed Social Security numbers, medical information, credit card numbers, details of suicide attempts, and other sensitive personal information.[25][26][27][28]The wikileaks.org domain name was registered on 4 October 2006.[4] The website was established and published its first document in December 2006.[29][30] WikiLeaks is usually represented in public by Julian Assange, who has been described as "the heart and soul of this organisation, its founder, philosopher, spokesperson, original coder, organiser, financier, and all the rest".[31][32] Sarah Harrison, Kristinn Hrafnsson and Joseph Farrell are the only other publicly known and acknowledged associates of Assange who are currently living.[33] Harrison is also a member of Sunshine Press Productions along with Assange and Ingi Ragnar Ingason.[34][35] Gavin MacFayden was acknowledged by Assange as a ″beloved director of WikiLeaks″ shortly after his death in 2016.[36]
WikiLeaks was originally established with a "wiki" communal publication method, which was terminated by May 2010.[37] Original volunteers and founders were once described as a mixture of Asian dissidents, journalists, mathematicians, and start-up company technologists from the United States, Taiwan, Europe, Australia, and South Africa.[38] As of  June 2009[update], the website had more than 1,200 registered volunteers.[38][39][40]
Despite some popular confusion, related to the fact both sites use the "wiki" name and website design template, WikiLeaks and Wikipedia are not affiliated.[41] Wikia, a for-profit corporation affiliated loosely with the Wikimedia Foundation, purchased several WikiLeaks-related domain names as a "protective brand measure" in 2007.[42]
On 26 September 2018, Julian Assange stepped down as editor in chief of WikiLeaks.[citation needed]
According to the WikiLeaks website, its goal is "to bring important news and information to the public ... One of our most important activities is to publish original source material alongside our news stories so readers and historians alike can see evidence of the truth." Another of the organisation's goals is to ensure that journalists and whistleblowers are not prosecuted for emailing sensitive or classified documents. The online "drop box" is described by the WikiLeaks website as "an innovative, secure and anonymous way for sources to leak information to [WikiLeaks] journalists".[43]
Some describe WikiLeaks as a media or journalistic organisation. For example, in a 2013 resolution, the International Federation of Journalists, a trade union of journalists, called WikiLeaks a "new breed of media organisation" that "offers important opportunities for media organisations".[44] Harvard professor Yochai Benkler praised WikiLeaks as a new form of journalistic enterprise,[45] testifying at the court-martial of Chelsea Manning (then Bradley Manning) that "WikiLeaks did serve a particular journalistic function," and that the "range of the journalist's privilege" is "a hard line to draw".[46] Others do not consider WikiLeaks to be journalistic in nature. Media ethicist Kelly McBride of the Poynter Institute for Media Studies wrote in 2011: "WikiLeaks might grow into a journalist endeavor. But it's not there yet."[47] Bill Keller of The New York Times considers WikiLeaks to be a "complicated source" rather than a journalistic partner.[47] Prominent First Amendment lawyer Floyd Abrams writes that WikiLeaks is not a journalistic group, but instead "an organization of political activists; ... a source for journalists; and ... a conduit of leaked information to the press and the public".[48] Noting Assange's statements that he and his colleagues read only a small fraction of information before deciding to publish it, Abrams writes: "No journalistic entity I have ever heard of—none—simply releases to the world an elephantine amount of material it has not read."[48]
According to a January 2010 interview, the WikiLeaks team then consisted of five people working full-time and about 800 people who worked occasionally, none of whom were compensated.[49] WikiLeaks does not have any official headquarters. In November 2010 the WikiLeaks-endorsed[50] news and activism site WikiLeaks Central was initiated and was administrated by editor Heather Marsh who oversaw over 70 writers and volunteers.[51] She resigned on 8 March 2012.[52]
WikiLeaks describes itself as "an uncensorable system for untraceable mass document leaking".[53] The website is available on multiple servers, different domain names and has an official Darkweb version (available on the Tor Network) as a result of a number of denial-of-service attacks and its elimination from different Domain Name System (DNS) providers.[54][55]
Until August 2010, WikiLeaks was hosted by PRQ, a Sweden-based company providing "highly secure, no-questions-asked hosting services". PRQ is said to have "almost no information about its clientele and maintains few if any of its own logs".[56] Currently, WikiLeaks is hosted mainly by the Swedish Internet service provider Bahnhof in the Pionen facility, a former nuclear bunker in Sweden.[57][58] Other servers are spread around the world with the main server located in Sweden.[59] Julian Assange has said that the servers are located in Sweden and the other countries "specifically because those nations offer legal protection to the disclosures made on the site". He talks about the Swedish constitution, which gives the information–providers total legal protection.[59] It is forbidden, according to Swedish law, for any administrative authority to make inquiries about the sources of any type of newspaper.[60] These laws, and the hosting by PRQ, make it difficult for any authority to eliminate WikiLeaks; they place an onus of proof upon any complainant whose suit would circumscribe WikiLeaks' liberty, e.g. its rights to exercise free speech online. Furthermore, "WikiLeaks maintains its own servers at undisclosed locations, keeps no logs and uses military-grade encryption to protect sources and other confidential information." Such arrangements have been called "bulletproof hosting".[56][61]
After the site became the target of a denial-of-service attack on its old servers, WikiLeaks moved its website to Amazon's servers.[62] Later, however, the website was "ousted" from the Amazon servers.[62] In a public statement, Amazon said that WikiLeaks was not following its terms of service. The company further explained: "There were several parts they were violating. For example, our terms of service state that 'you represent and warrant that you own or otherwise control all of the rights to the content ... that use of the content you supply does not violate this policy and will not cause injury to any person or entity.' It's clear that WikiLeaks doesn't own or otherwise control all the rights to this classified content."[63] WikiLeaks was then moved to servers at OVH, a private web-hosting service in France.[64] After criticism from the French government, the company sought two court rulings about the legality of hosting WikiLeaks. While the court in Lille immediately refused to force OVH to deactivate the WikiLeaks website, the court in Paris stated it would need more time to examine the complex technical issue.[65][66]
WikiLeaks used EveryDNS, but was dropped by the company after distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks against WikiLeaks hurt the quality of service for its other customers. Supporters of WikiLeaks waged verbal and DDoS attacks on EveryDNS. Because of a typographical error in blogs mistaking EveryDNS for competitor EasyDNS, the sizeable Internet backlash hit EasyDNS. Despite that, EasyDNS (upon request of a customer who was setting up new WikiLeaks hosting) began providing WikiLeaks with DNS service on "two 'battle hardened' servers" to protect the quality of service for its other customers.[67]
WikiLeaks restructured its process for contributions after its first document leaks did not gain much attention. Assange stated this was part of an attempt to take the voluntary effort typically seen in "Wiki" projects, and "redirect it to ... material that has real potential for change".[68] Some sympathisers were unhappy[citation needed] when WikiLeaks ended a community-based wiki format in favour of a more centralised organisation. The "about" page originally read:[69]
To the user, WikiLeaks will look very much like Wikipedia. Anybody can post to it, anybody can edit it. No technical knowledge is required. Leakers can post documents anonymously and untraceably. Users can publicly discuss documents and analyse their credibility and veracity. Users can discuss interpretations and context and collaboratively formulate collective publications. Users can read and write explanatory articles on leaks along with background material and context. The political relevance of documents and their verisimilitude will be revealed by a cast of thousands.
However, WikiLeaks established an editorial policy that accepted only documents that were "of political, diplomatic, historical or ethical interest" (and excluded "material that is already publicly available").[70] This coincided with early criticism that having no editorial policy would drive out good material with spam and promote "automated or indiscriminate publication of confidential records".[71] The original FAQ is no longer in effect, and no one can post or edit documents on WikiLeaks. Now, submissions to WikiLeaks are reviewed by anonymous WikiLeaks reviewers, and documents that do not meet the editorial criteria are rejected. By 2008, the revised FAQ stated: "Anybody can post comments to it. [ ... ] Users can publicly discuss documents and analyse their credibility and veracity."[72] After the 2010 reorganisation, posting new comments on leaks was no longer possible.[37]
The legal status of WikiLeaks is complex. Assange considers WikiLeaks a protection intermediary. Rather than leaking directly to the press, and fearing exposure and retribution, whistleblowers can leak to WikiLeaks, which then leaks to the press for them.[73] Its servers are located throughout Europe and are accessible from any uncensored web connection. The group located its headquarters in Sweden because it has one of the world's strongest laws to protect confidential source-journalist relationships.[74][75] WikiLeaks has stated it does not solicit any information.[74] However, Assange used his speech during the Hack in the Box conference in Malaysia to ask the crowd of hackers and security researchers to help find documents on its "Most Wanted Leaks of 2009" list.[76]
The US Justice Department began a criminal investigation of WikiLeaks and Julian Assange soon after the leak of diplomatic cables began.[77][78] Attorney General Eric Holder affirmed the investigation was "not saber-rattling", but was "an active, ongoing criminal investigation".[78] The Washington Post reported that the department was considering charges under the Espionage Act of 1917, an action which former prosecutors characterised as "difficult" because of First Amendment protections for the press.[77][79] Several Supreme Court cases (e.g. Bartnicki v. Vopper) have established previously that the American Constitution protects the re-publication of illegally gained information provided the publishers did not themselves violate any laws in acquiring it.[80] Federal prosecutors have also considered prosecuting Assange for trafficking in stolen government property, but since the diplomatic cables are intellectual rather than physical property, that method is also difficult.[81] Any prosecution of Assange would require extraditing him to the United States, a procedure made more complicated and potentially delayed by any preceding extradition to Sweden.[82] One of Assange's lawyers, however, says they are fighting extradition to Sweden because it might result in his extradition to the United States.[83] Assange's attorney, Mark Stephens, has "heard from Swedish authorities there has been a secretly empanelled grand jury in Alexandria [Virginia]" meeting to consider criminal charges for the WikiLeaks case.[84]
In Australia, the government and the Australian Federal Police have not stated what Australian laws may have been violated by WikiLeaks, but then Prime Minister Julia Gillard has stated that the foundation of WikiLeaks and the stealing of classified documents from the United States administration is illegal in foreign countries.[85] Gillard later clarified her statement as referring to "the original theft of the material by a junior U.S. serviceman rather than any action by Mr Assange."[86] Spencer Zifcak, president of Liberty Victoria, an Australian civil liberties group, notes that without a charge or a trial completed, it is inappropriate to state that WikiLeaks is guilty of illegal activities.[87]
On threats by various governments towards Julian Assange, legal expert Ben Saul argues that Assange is the target of a global smear campaign to demonise him as a criminal or as a terrorist, without any legal basis.[88][89] The US Center for Constitutional Rights has issued a statement emphasising its alarm at the "multiple examples of legal overreach and irregularities" in his arrest.[90]
In a UK Supreme Court Judgement given on 8 February 2018, the court unanimously decided that a document leaked through WikiLeaks "could be admitted into evidence".[91][92]
The appeal that led to this ruling centred on a US government cable provided by Chelsea Manning and published by WikiLeaks. The Chagos islanders argued that the document showed the UK's motive for setting up a marine park on their territory was improper, but it had been excluded from proceedings earlier in the case.[93]
In an "important test of Vienna Convention in relation to Wikileaks documents" The Court ruled that "the cable should have been admitted into evidence before the Administrative Court", addressing the main issue. During this decision, the leaked document was said to not meet the criteria necessary to help the Chagos Refugee Group recover their homeland.[92][93]
WikiLeaks is a self-described not-for-profit organisation, funded largely by volunteers, and it is dependent on public donations. Its main financing methods include conventional bank transfers and online payment systems. According to Assange, WikiLeaks' lawyers often work pro bono. Assange has said that in some cases legal aid has been donated by media organisations such as the Associated Press, the Los Angeles Times, and the National Newspaper Publishers Association.[49] Assange said in 2010 that WikiLeaks' only revenue consists of donations, but it has considered other options including auctioning early access to documents.[49] During September 2011, WikiLeaks began auctioning items on eBay to raise funds, and Assange told an audience at Sydney's Festival of Dangerous Ideas that the organisation might not be able to survive.[citation needed]
On 24 December 2009, WikiLeaks announced that it was experiencing a shortage of funds[citation needed] and suspended all access to its website except for a form to submit new material.[94] Material that was previously published was no longer available, although some could still be accessed on unofficial mirror websites.[95] WikiLeaks stated on its website that it would resume full operation once the operational costs were paid.[94] WikiLeaks saw this as a kind of work stoppage "to ensure that everyone who is involved stops normal work and actually spends time raising revenue".[49] While the organisation initially planned for funds to be secured by 6 January 2010,[citation needed] it was not until 3 February 2010 that WikiLeaks announced that its minimum fundraising goal had been achieved.[citation needed]
The Wau Holland Foundation helps to process donations to WikiLeaks. In July 2010, the Foundation stated that WikiLeaks was not receiving any money for personnel costs, only for hardware, travelling and bandwidth.[96] An article in TechEye stated: 
As a charity accountable under German law, donations for WikiLeaks can be made to the foundation. Funds are held in escrow and are given to WikiLeaks after the whistleblower website files an application containing a statement with proof of payment. The foundation does not pay any sort of salary nor give any renumeration  [sic] to WikiLeaks' personnel, corroborating the statement of the site's former German representative Daniel Schmitt [real name Daniel Domscheit-Berg][97] on national television that all personnel works voluntarily, even its speakers.[96]
However, in December 2010 the Wau Holland Foundation stated that 4 permanent employees, including Julian Assange, had begun to receive salaries.[98]
In 2010, Assange said the organisation was registered as a library in Australia, a foundation in France, and a newspaper in Sweden, and that it also used two United States-based non-profit 501c3 organisations for funding purposes.[99]
On 22 January 2010, the Internet payment intermediary PayPal suspended WikiLeaks' donation account and froze its assets. WikiLeaks said that this had happened before, and was done for "no obvious reason".[citation needed] The account was restored on 25 January 2010.[citation needed] On 18 May 2010, WikiLeaks announced that its website and archive were operational again.[citation needed]
In June 2010, WikiLeaks was a finalist for a grant of more than half a million dollars from the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation,[30] but did not make the final approval.[100] WikiLeaks commented via Twitter: "WikiLeaks was highest rated project in the Knight challenge, strongly recommended to the board but gets no funding. Go figure."[101] WikiLeaks said that the Knight foundation announced the award to "'12 Grantees who will impact future of news' – but not WikiLeaks" and questioned whether Knight foundation was "really looking for impact".[100] A spokesman of the Knight Foundation disputed parts of WikiLeaks' statement, saying "WikiLeaks was not recommended by Knight staff to the board."[101] However, he declined to say whether WikiLeaks was the project rated highest by the Knight advisory panel, which consists of non-staffers, among them journalist Jennifer 8. Lee, who has done PR work for WikiLeaks with the press and on social networking websites.[101]
During 2010, WikiLeaks received €635,772.73 in PayPal donations, less €30,000 in PayPal fees, and €695,925.46 in bank transfers. €500,988.89 of the sum was received in the month of December, primarily as bank transfers as PayPal suspended payments 4 December. €298,057.38 of the remainder was received in April.[102]
The Wau Holland Foundation, one of the WikiLeaks' main funding channels, stated that they received more than €900,000 in public donations between October 2009 and December 2010, of which €370,000 has been passed on to WikiLeaks. Hendrik Fulda, vice-president of the Wau Holland Foundation, mentioned that the Foundation had been receiving twice as many donations through PayPal as through normal banks, before PayPal's decision to suspend WikiLeaks' account. He also noted that every new WikiLeaks publication brought "a wave of support", and that donations were strongest in the weeks after WikiLeaks started publishing leaked diplomatic cables.[103][104]
The Icelandic judiciary decided that Valitor (a company related to Visa and MasterCard) was violating the law when it prevented donation to the site by credit card. A justice ruled that the donations will be allowed to return to the site after 14 days or they would be fined in the amount of US$6,000 a day.[105]
WikiLeaks posted its first document in December 2006, a decision to assassinate government officials signed by Sheikh Hassan Dahir Aweys.[30] In August 2007, the UK newspaper The Guardian published a story about corruption by the family of the former Kenyan leader Daniel arap Moi based on information provided via WikiLeaks.[106] In November 2007, a March 2003 copy of Standard Operating Procedures for Camp Delta detailing the protocol of the US Army at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp was released.[107][108] The document revealed that some prisoners were off-limits to the International Committee of the Red Cross, something that the US military had in the past denied repeatedly.[109] In February 2008, WikiLeaks released allegations of illegal activities at the Cayman Islands branch of the Swiss Bank Julius Baer, which resulted in the bank suing WikiLeaks and obtaining an injunction which temporarily suspended the operation of wikileaks.org.[110] The California judge had the service provider of WikiLeaks block the site's domain (wikileaks.org) on 18 February 2008, although the bank only wanted the documents to be removed but WikiLeaks had failed to name a contact. The website was instantly mirrored by supporters, and later that month the judge overturned his previous decision citing First Amendment concerns and questions about legal jurisdiction.[111][112] In March 2008, WikiLeaks published what they referred to as "the collected secret 'bibles' of Scientology", and three days later received letters threatening to sue them for breach of copyright.[113] In September 2008, during the 2008 United States presidential election campaigns, the contents of a Yahoo account belonging to Sarah Palin (the running mate of Republican presidential nominee John McCain) were posted on WikiLeaks after being hacked into by members of a group known as Anonymous.[114][115] In November 2008, the membership list of the far-right British National Party was posted to WikiLeaks, after appearing briefly on a weblog.[116] A year later, in October 2009, another list of BNP members was leaked.[117]
In January 2009, WikiLeaks released 86 telephone intercept recordings of Peruvian politicians and businessmen involved in the 2008 Peru oil scandal.[118] During February, WikiLeaks released 6,780 Congressional Research Service reports[119] followed in March by a list of contributors to the Norm Coleman senatorial campaign[120][121] and a set of documents belonging to Barclays Bank that had been ordered removed from the website of The Guardian.[122] In July, it released a report relating to a serious nuclear accident that had occurred at the Iranian Natanz nuclear facility in 2009.[123] Later media reports have suggested that the accident was related to the Stuxnet computer worm.[124][125] In September, internal documents from Kaupthing Bank were leaked, from shortly before the collapse of Iceland's banking sector, which caused the 2008–2012 Icelandic financial crisis. The document shows that suspiciously large sums of money were loaned to various owners of the bank, and large debts written off.[126] In October, Joint Services Protocol 440, a British document advising the security services on how to avoid documents being leaked, was published by WikiLeaks.[127] Later that month, it announced that a super-injunction was being used by the commodities company Trafigura to stop The Guardian (London) from reporting on a leaked internal document regarding a toxic dumping incident in Côte d'Ivoire.[128][129] In November, it hosted copies of e-mail correspondence between climate scientists, although they were not leaked originally to WikiLeaks.[130][131] It also released 570,000 intercepts of pager messages sent on the day of the 11 September attacks.[132][133][134] During 2008 and 2009, WikiLeaks published the alleged lists of forbidden or illegal web addresses for Australia, Denmark and Thailand. These were originally created to prevent access to child pornography and terrorism, but the leaks revealed that other sites featuring unrelated subjects were also listed.[135][136][137]
In mid-February 2010, WikiLeaks received a leaked diplomatic cable from the United States Embassy in Reykjavik relating to the Icesave scandal, which they published on 18 February.[138] The cable, known as Reykjavik 13, was the first of the classified documents WikiLeaks published among those allegedly provided to them by United States Army Private Chelsea Manning (then known as Bradley). In March 2010, WikiLeaks released a secret 32-page US Department of Defense Counterintelligence Analysis Report written in March 2008 discussing the leaking of material by WikiLeaks and how it could be deterred.[139][140][141] In April, a classified video of the 12 July 2007 Baghdad airstrike was released, showing two Reuters employees being fired at, after the pilots mistakenly thought the men were carrying weapons, which were in fact cameras.[142] After the mistaken killing, the video shows US forces firing on a family van that stopped to pick up the bodies.[143] In the week after the release, "wikileaks" was the search term with the most significant growth worldwide during the last seven days as measured by Google Insights.[144] In June 2010, Manning was arrested after alleged chat logs were given to United States authorities by former hacker Adrian Lamo, in whom she had confided. Manning reportedly told Lamo she had leaked the "Collateral Murder" video, in addition to a video of the Granai airstrike and about 260,000 diplomatic cables, to WikiLeaks.[145]
In July, WikiLeaks released 92,000 documents related to the war in Afghanistan between 2004 and the end of 2009 to the publications The Guardian, The New York Times and Der Spiegel. The documents detail individual incidents including "friendly fire" and civilian casualties.[146] About 15,000 of the 92,000 documents have not yet been released by WikiLeaks, as the group is currently reviewing the documents to remove some of the sources of the information. WikiLeaks asked the Pentagon and human-rights groups to help remove names from the documents to reduce the potential harm caused by their release, but did not receive assistance.[147] After the Love Parade stampede in Duisburg, Germany, on 24 July 2010, a local resident published internal documents of the city administration regarding the planning of Love Parade. The city government reacted by securing a court order on 16 August forcing the removal of the documents from the website on which it was hosted.[148] On 20 August 2010, WikiLeaks released a publication entitled Loveparade 2010 Duisburg planning documents, 2007–2010, which comprised 43 internal documents regarding the Love Parade 2010.[149][150] After the leak of information concerning the Afghan War, in October 2010, around 400,000 documents relating to the Iraq War were released. The BBC quoted the US Department of Defense referring to the Iraq War Logs as "the largest leak of classified documents in its history". Media coverage of the leaked documents emphasised claims that the US government had ignored reports of torture by the Iraqi authorities during the period after the 2003 war.[151]
On 29 July 2010 WikiLeaks added an "Insurance file" to the Afghan War Diary page. The file is AES encrypted.[152][citation needed] There has been speculation that it was intended to serve as insurance in case the WikiLeaks website or its spokesman Julian Assange are incapacitated, upon which the passphrase could be published.[153][154] After the first few days' release of the US diplomatic cables starting 28 November 2010, the US television broadcasting company CBS predicted that "If anything happens to Assange or the website, a key will go out to unlock the files. There would then be no way to stop the information from spreading like wildfire because so many people already have copies."[155] CBS correspondent Declan McCullagh stated, "What most folks are speculating is that the insurance file contains unreleased information that would be especially embarrassing to the US government if it were released."[155]
On 28 November 2010, WikiLeaks and five major newspapers from Spain (El País), France (Le Monde), Germany (Der Spiegel), the United Kingdom (The Guardian), and the United States (The New York Times) started simultaneously to publish the first 220 of 251,287 leaked documents labelled confidential – but not top-secret – and dated from 28 December 1966 to 28 February 2010.[156][157] WikiLeaks planned to release the entirety of the cables in phases over several months.[needs update][157]
The contents of the diplomatic cables include numerous unguarded comments and revelations regarding: critiques and praises about the host countries of various United States embassies; political manoeuvring regarding climate change; discussion and resolutions towards ending ongoing tension in the Middle East; efforts and resistance towards nuclear disarmament; actions in the War on Terror; assessments of other threats around the world; dealings between various countries; United States intelligence and counterintelligence efforts; and other diplomatic actions. Reactions to the United States diplomatic cables leak varied. On 14 December 2010 the United States Department of Justice issued a subpoena directing Twitter to provide information for accounts registered to or associated with WikiLeaks.[158] Twitter decided to notify its users.[159] The overthrow of the presidency in Tunisia of 2011 has been attributed partly to reaction against the corruption revealed by leaked cables.[160][161][162]
On 1 September 2011, it became public that an encrypted version of WikiLeaks' huge archive of unredacted US State Department cables had been available via BitTorrent for months and that the decryption key (similar to a password) was available to those who knew where to find it.[163][164] Guardian newspaper editor David Leigh had just published the decryption key in his book, so the files were now publicly available to anyone. Rather than let malicious actors publish selected data, WikiLeaks decided to publish the entire, unredacted archive in searchable form on its website.[citation needed]
In late April 2011, files related to the Guantanamo prison were released.[165] In December 2011, WikiLeaks started to release the Spy Files.[166] On 27 February 2012, WikiLeaks began publishing more than five million emails from the Texas-headquartered "global intelligence" company Stratfor.[167] On 5 July 2012, WikiLeaks began publishing the Syria Files (emails from Syrian political figures 2006–2012).[168] On 25 October 2012, WikiLeaks began publishing The Detainee Policies, files covering the rules and procedures for detainees in US military custody.[169] In April 2013 WikiLeaks published more than 1.7 million US diplomatic and intelligence documents from the 1970s, including the Kissinger cables.[170]
In 2013, the organisation assisted Edward Snowden (who is responsible for the 2013 mass surveillance disclosures) in leaving Hong Kong. Sarah Harrison, a WikiLeaks activist, accompanied Snowden on the flight. Scott Shane of The New York Times stated that the WikiLeaks involvement "shows that despite its shoestring staff, limited fund-raising from a boycott by major financial firms, and defections prompted by Mr. Assange's personal troubles and abrasive style, it remains a force to be reckoned with on the global stage."[171]
In September 2013, WikiLeaks published "Spy Files 3", 250 documents from more than 90 surveillance companies.[172] On 13 November 2013, a draft of the Trans-Pacific Partnership's Intellectual Property Rights chapter was published by WikiLeaks.[173][174] On 10 June 2015, WikiLeaks published the draft on the Trans-Pacific Partnership's Transparency for Healthcare Annex, along with each country's negotiating position.[175] On 19 June 2015 WikiLeaks began publishing The Saudi Cables: more than half a million cables and other documents from the Saudi Foreign Ministry that contain secret communications from various Saudi Embassies around the world.[176]
On 23 June 2015, WikiLeaks published documents under the name of "Espionnage Élysée", which showed that NSA spied on the French government, including but not limited to then President Francois Hollande and his predecessors Nicolas Sarkozy and Jacques Chirac.[177] On 29 June 2015, WikiLeaks published more NSA top secrets intercepts regarding France, detailing an economic espionage against French companies and associations.[178] In July 2015, WikiLeaks published documents which showed that the NSA had tapped the telephones of many German federal ministries, including that of the Chancellor Angela Merkel, for years since the 1990s.[179] On 4 July 2015, WikiLeaks published documents which showed that 29 Brazilian government numbers were selected for secret espionage by the NSA. Among the targets there were also the President Dilma Rousseff, many assistants and advisors, her presidential jet and other key figures in the Brazilian government.[180]
On 29 July 2015, WikiLeaks published a top secret letter from the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP) Ministerial Meeting in December 2013 which illustrated the position of negotiating countries on "state-owned enterprises" (SOEs).[181] On 31 July 2015, WikiLeaks published secret intercepts and the related target list showing that the NSA spied on Japanese government, including the Cabinet and Japanese companies such as Mitsubishi and Mitsui. The documents revealed that United States espionage against Japan concerned broad sections of communications about the US-Japan diplomatic relationship and Japan's position on climate change issues, other than an extensive monitoring of the Japanese economy.[182] On 21 October 2015 WikiLeaks published some of John O. Brennan's emails, including a draft security clearance application which contained personal information.[183]
On 4 July 2016, WikiLeaks tweeted a link to a trove of emails sent or received by then-US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and released under the Freedom of Information Act.[184] The link contained 1258 emails sent from Clinton's personal mail server which were selected in terms of their relevance to the Iraq War and were apparently timed to precede the release of the UK government's Iraq Inquiry report.[185]
On 19 July 2016, in response to the Turkish government's purges that followed the coup attempt,[186] WikiLeaks released 294,548 emails from Turkey's ruling Justice and Development party (AKP).[187] According to WikiLeaks, the material, which they claim to be the first batch from the "AKP Emails", was obtained a week before the attempted coup in the country and "is not connected, in any way, to the elements behind the attempted coup, or to a rival political party or state".[188] After WikiLeaks announced that they would release the emails, the organisation stayed for over 24 hours under a "sustained attack".[citation needed] Following the leak, the Turkish government ordered the site to be blocked nationwide.[189][190][191][192] WikiLeaks had also tweeted a link to a database which contained sensitive information, such as the Turkish Identification Number, of approximately 50 million Turkish citizens, including nearly every female voter in Turkey.[193] This information first appeared online in April of the same year and was not in the files uploaded by WikiLeaks,[194] but in files archived by Michael Best, who then removed it when the personal data was discovered.[195][196][197]
On 22 July 2016, WikiLeaks released approximately 20,000 emails and 8,000 files sent from or received by Democratic National Committee (DNC) personnel.[198] Some of the emails contained personal information of donors, including home addresses and Social Security numbers.[199] Other emails appeared to criticise Bernie Sanders and showed apparent favouritism towards Clinton.[200][201]
On 7 October 2016, WikiLeaks started releasing series of emails and documents sent from or received by Hillary Clinton campaign manager John Podesta, including Hillary Clinton's paid speeches to banks.[202][203][204][205] According to a spokesman for the Clinton campaign, "By dribbling these out every day WikiLeaks is proving they are nothing but a propaganda arm of the Kremlin with a political agenda doing Vladimir Putin's dirty work to help elect Donald Trump."[206] The New York Times reported that when asked, president Vladimir Putin replied that Russia was being falsely accused. "The hysteria is merely caused by the fact that somebody needs to divert the attention of the American people from the essence of what was exposed by the hackers."[207][208]
On 17 October 2016 WikiLeaks announced that a "state party" had severed the Internet connection of Julian Assange at the Ecuadorian embassy. WikiLeaks blamed United States Secretary of State John Kerry of pressuring the Ecuadorian government in severing Assange's Internet, an accusation which the United States State Department denied.[209] The Ecuadorian government stated that it had "temporarily" severed Assange's Internet connection because of WikiLeaks' release of documents "impacting on the U.S. election campaign," although it also stated that this was not meant to prevent WikiLeaks from operating.[210]
On 16 February 2017, WikiLeaks released a purported report on CIA espionage orders (marked as NOFORN) for the 2012 French presidential election.[211][212][213] The order called for details of party funding, internal rivalries and future attitudes toward the United States. The Associated Press noted that "the orders seemed to represent standard intelligence-gathering."[214]
On 7 March 2017, WikiLeaks started publishing content code-named "Vault 7". In a series of tweets and a Facebook Live + Periscope press conference, WikiLeaks announced these documents contain CIA internal documentation of their "massive arsenal" of hacking tools including malware, viruses trojects, weaponised "zero day" exploits and remote control systems to name a few.[215][216][217] Leaked documents, dated from 2013–2016, detail the capabilities of the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to perform electronic surveillance and cyber warfare, such as the ability to compromise cars, smart TVs,[217] web browsers (including Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Mozilla Firefox, and Opera Software ASA),[218][219][220] and the operating systems of most smartphones (including Apple's iOS and Google's Android), as well as other operating systems such as Microsoft Windows, macOS, and Linux.[221]
On 5 May 2017, WikiLeaks posted links to e-mails purported to be from Emmanuel Macron's campaign in the French 2017 presidential election.[222] The documents were first relayed on the 4chan forum (used by far-right American groups) and by pro-Trump Twitter accounts, and then by WikiLeaks, who indicated they did not author the leaks.[222][223] Experts have asserted that the WikiLeaks Twitter account played a key role in publicising the leaks through the hashtag #MacronLeaks just some three-and-a-half hours after the first tweet with hashtag appeared.[224][225] The campaign stated that false documents were mixed in with real ones, and that "the ambition of the authors of this leak is obviously to harm the movement En Marche! in the final hours before the second round of the French presidential election".[222][226] France's Electoral Commission described the action as a "massive and coordinated piracy action".[226][222] France's Electoral Commission urged journalists not to report on the contents of the leaks, but to heed "the sense of responsibility they must demonstrate, as at stake are the free expression of voters and the sincerity of the election".[226] Cybersecurity experts initially believed that groups linked to Russia were involved in this attack. The Kremlin denied any involvement.[227][228][229] The head of the French cyber-security agency, ANSSI, later said that they did not have evidence connecting the hack with Russia, saying that the attack was so simple, that "we can imagine that it was a person who did this alone. They could be in any country."[230]
In September 2017, WikiLeaks released "Spy Files Russia," revealing "how a St. Petersburg-based technology company called Peter-Service helped state entities gather detailed data on Russian cellphone users, part of a national system of online surveillance called System for Operative Investigative Activities (SORM)."[231]
In January 2011, Rudolf Elmer, a former Swiss banker, passed data containing account details of 2,000 prominent people to Assange, who stated that the information will be vetted before being made publicly available at a later date.[232] In May 2010, WikiLeaks said it had video footage of a massacre of civilians in Afghanistan by the US military which they were preparing to release.[233][234] In an interview with Chris Anderson on 19 July 2010, Assange showed a document WikiLeaks had on an Albanian oil-well blowout, and said they also had material from inside British Petroleum,[235] and that they were "getting enormous quantity of whistle-blower disclosures of a very high calibre" but added that they had not been able to verify and release the material because they did not have enough volunteer journalists.[236] In December 2010, Assange's lawyer, Mark Stephens, told The Andrew Marr Show on BBC Television that WikiLeaks had information it considered to be a "thermo-nuclear device" which it would release if the organisation needs to defend itself against the authorities.[237]
In a 2009 interview by the magazine Computerworld, Assange claimed to be in possession of "5GB from Bank of America". In 2010, he told Forbes magazine that WikiLeaks was planning another "megaleak" early in 2011, from the private sector, involving "a big U.S. bank" and revealing an "ecosystem of corruption". Bank of America's stock price decreased by 3%, apparently as a result of this announcement.[238][239] Assange commented on the possible effect of the release that "it could take down a bank or two".[240][241] In August 2011, Reuters announced that Daniel Domscheit-Berg had destroyed approximately 5GB of data cache from Bank of America, that Assange had under his control.[242]
In October 2010, Assange told a major Moscow newspaper that "The Kremlin had better brace itself for a coming wave of WikiLeaks disclosures about Russia".[243][244] Assange later clarified: "we have material on many businesses and governments, including in Russia. It's not right to say there's going to be a particular focus on Russia".[245]
WikiLeaks has contended that it has never released a misattributed document and that documents are assessed before release. In response to concerns about the possibility of misleading or fraudulent leaks, WikiLeaks has stated that misleading leaks "are already well-placed in the mainstream media. WikiLeaks is of no additional assistance."[246] The FAQ states that: "The simplest and most effective countermeasure is a worldwide community of informed users and editors who can scrutinise and discuss leaked documents."[247] According to statements by Assange in 2010, submitted documents are vetted by a group of five reviewers, with expertise in different topics such as language or programming, who also investigate the background of the leaker if his or her identity is known.[248] In that group, Assange has the final decision about the assessment of a document.[248]
Columnist Eric Zorn wrote in 2016 that "it's possible, even likely, that every stolen email WikiLeaks has posted has been authentic."[249] (Writer Glenn Greenwald goes further, asserting that WikiLeaks has a "perfect, long-standing record of only publishing authentic documents."[250]) However, cybersecurity experts agree that it is trivially easy for a person to fabricate an email or alter it, as by changing headers and metadata.[249] Some of the more recent releases, such as many of the emails contained in the Podesta emails, contain DKIM headers. This allows them to be verified as genuine to some degree of certainty.[251]
In July 2016, the Aspen Institute's Homeland Security Group, a bipartisan counterterrorism organisation, warned that hackers who stole authentic data might "salt the files they release with plausible forgeries."[249] Russian intelligence agencies have frequently used disinformation tactics, "which means carefully faked emails might be included in the WikiLeaks dumps. After all, the best way to make false information believable is to mix it in with true information."[252]
WikiLeaks has promoted conspiracy theories about the murder of Seth Rich.[253][254][255] Unfounded conspiracy theories, spread by some right-wing figures and media outlets, hold that Rich was the source of leaked emails and was killed for working with WikiLeaks.[256] WikiLeaks fuelled the conspiracy theories by offering a reward of $20,000 for information leading to the capture of Rich's killer and hinting that Rich may have been the source of the leaked emails.[257] No evidence supports the claim that Rich was the source of the leaks.[19][258]
The Guardian wrote that WikiLeaks, along with individuals and groups on the hard right, had been involved in the "ruthless exploitation of [Rich's] death for political purposes".[259] The executive director of the Sunlight Foundation, an organization that advocates for open government, was critical of WikiLeaks' fueling of conspiracy theories surrounding the murder of Seth Rich: "If they feel like they have a link to the staffer's death, they should say it and be responsible about it. The insinuations, to me, are just disgusting."[260]
WikiLeaks has popularized conspiracies about the Democratic Party and Hillary Clinton, such as tweeting an article which suggested Clinton campaign chairperson John Podesta engaged in satanic rituals (which was later revealed to be false),[18][261][262] implying that the Democratic Party had Seth Rich killed,[19] suggesting that Clinton wore earpieces to debates and interviews,[263] claiming that Hillary Clinton wanted to drone strike Assange,[264] promoting conspiracy theories about Clinton's health,[20][265][266] and promoting a conspiracy theory from a Donald Trump–related Internet community tying the Clinton campaign to child kidnapper Laura Silsby.[267]
Short of simply disclosing information in the public interest, WikiLeaks has been accused of purposely targeting certain states and people, and presenting its disclosures in misleading and conspiratorial ways to harm those people.[261] Writing in 2012, Foreign Policy's Joshua Keating noted that "nearly all its major operations have targeted the U.S. government or American corporations."[268] In a 2017 speech addressing the Center for Strategic and International Studies, CIA Director Mike Pompeo referred to WikiLeaks as "a non-state hostile intelligence service" and described founder Julian Assange as a narcissist, fraud, and coward.[269]
Assange wrote on WikiLeaks in February 2016: "I have had years of experience in dealing with Hillary Clinton and have read thousands of her cables. Hillary lacks judgement and will push the United States into endless, stupid wars which spread terrorism. ...  she certainly should not become president of the United States."[270] In July 2017, during an interview by Amy Goodman, Julian Assange said that choosing between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump is like choosing between cholera or gonorrhea. "Personally, I would prefer neither."[271] WikiLeaks editor, Sarah Harrison, has stated that the site is not choosing which damaging publications to release, rather releasing information that is available to them.[272]
In conversations that were leaked in February 2018, WikiLeaks expressed a preference for a Republican victory in the 2016 election.[21]
Having released information that exposed the inner working of a broad range of organisations and politicians, WikiLeaks started by 2016 to focus almost exclusively on Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton.[273] In the 2016 US presidential election, WikiLeaks only exposed material damaging to the Democratic National Committee and Hillary Clinton. WikiLeaks even rejected the opportunity to publish unrelated leaks, because it dedicated all its resources to Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party. According to The New York Times, WikiLeaks timed one of its large leaks so that it would happen on the eve of the Democratic Convention.[274] The Washington Post noted that the leaks came at an important sensitive moment in the Clinton campaign, as she was preparing to announce her vice-presidential pick and unite the party behind her.[275] The Sunlight Foundation, an organisation that advocates for open government, said that such actions meant that WikiLeaks was no longer striving to be transparent but rather sought to achieve political goals: "It's become something else. It's not striving for objectivity. It's more careless. When they publish information it appears to be in service of some specific goal, of retribution, at the expense of the individual."[260]
WikiLeaks explained its actions in a 2017 statement to Foreign Policy: "WikiLeaks schedules publications to maximize readership and reader engagement. During distracting media events such as the Olympics or a high profile election, unrelated publications are sometimes delayed until the distraction passes but never are rejected for this reason."[273] On 7 October 2016, an hour after the media had begun to dedicate wall-to-wall coverage of the revelation that Trump had bragged on video about sexually harassing women, WikiLeaks began to release emails hacked from the personal account of Clinton campaign chairman John Podesta.[276][277] CNN notes that due to extensive coverage of the Trump tapes, the leaks were an "afterthought" in news coverage.[276] Podesta suggested that the emails were timed to deflect attention from the Trump tapes.[277]
In 2010, Donald Trump called WikiLeaks "disgraceful" and suggested that the "death penalty" should be a punishment for WikiLeaks' releases of information.[278] Following the dump of e-mails hacked from the Hillary Clinton campaign, Donald Trump told voters, "I love WikiLeaks!"[279] Trump made many references to WikiLeaks during the course of the campaign; by one estimate, he referenced disclosures by WikiLeaks over 160 times in speeches during the last 30 days of the campaign.[280]
In November 2017, it was revealed that the WikiLeaks Twitter account corresponded with Donald Trump Jr. during the 2016 presidential election.[22] The correspondence shows how WikiLeaks actively solicited the co-operation of Trump Jr., a campaign surrogate and advisor in the campaign of his father. WikiLeaks urged the Trump campaign to reject the results of the 2016 presidential election at a time when it looked as if the Trump campaign would lose.[22] WikiLeaks asked Trump Jr. to share a false claim by Assange that Hillary Clinton had wanted to attack him with drones.[22] WikiLeaks also shared a link to a site that would help people to search through WikiLeaks documents.[22] Trump Jr. shared both. After the election, WikiLeaks also requested that the president-elect push Australia to appoint Assange as ambassador to the US. After The New York Times published a fragment of Donald Trump's tax returns for one year, WikiLeaks asked Trump Jr. for one or more of his father's tax returns, explaining that it would be in his father's best interest because it would "dramatically improve the perception of our impartiality" and not come "through the most biased source (e.g. NYT/MSNBC)."[22] WikiLeaks also asked Trump Jr. to leak his own e-mails to them days after The New York Times broke a story about e-mail correspondence between Trump Jr. and a Kremlin-affiliated lawyer; WikiLeaks said that it would be "beautifully confounding" for them to publish the e-mails and that it would deprive other news outlets from putting a negative spin on the correspondence.[22] Trump Jr. provided this correspondence to congressional investigators looking into Russian interference in the 2016 election.[22]
In August 2016, after WikiLeaks published thousands of DNC emails, it was claimed that Russian intelligence had hacked the e-mails and leaked them to WikiLeaks. At the time, DNC officials made such claims, along with a number of cybersecurity experts and cybersecurity firms.[281][282] In October 2016, the US intelligence community announced that it was "confident that the Russian Government directed the recent compromises of e-mails from U.S. persons and institutions, including from U.S. political organizations".[17] The US intelligence agencies said that the hacks were consistent with the methods of Russian-directed efforts, and that people high up within the Kremlin were likely involved.[17] On 14 October 2016, CNN reported that "there is mounting evidence that the Russian government is supplying WikiLeaks with hacked emails pertaining to the U.S. presidential election."[283]  WikiLeaks has denied any connection to or co-operation with Russia.[283] President Putin has strongly denied any Russian involvement in the election.[207][208]
In September 2016, the German weekly magazine Focus reported that according to a confidential German government dossier, WikiLeaks had long since been infiltrated by Russian agents aiming to discredit NATO governments. The magazine added that French and British intelligence services had come to the same conclusion and said Russian President Vladimir Putin and Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev receive details about what WikiLeaks publishes before publication.[284] The Focus report followed a New York Times story that suggested that WikiLeaks may be a laundering machine for compromising material about Western countries gathered by Russian spies.[285]
On 10 December 2016, several news outlets, including The Guardian and The Washington Post, reported that the Central Intelligence Agency concluded that Russia intelligence operatives provided materials to WikiLeaks in an effort to help Donald Trump's election bid. The Washington Post article stated: "The CIA has concluded in a secret assessment that Russia intervened in the 2016 election to help Donald Trump win the presidency, rather than just to undermine confidence in the U.S. electoral system, according to officials briefed on the matter."[286] The Guardian article reported, "individuals linked to the Russian government had provided WikiLeaks with thousands of confidential emails stolen from the Democratic National Committee (DNC) and others."[287] WikiLeaks has frequently been criticised for its absence of whistleblowing on or criticism of Russia.[23] The Guardian notes that journalists are killed frequently in Russia, and notes that Freedom House has ranked Russian press freedom as "not free ... The main national news agenda is firmly controlled by the Kremlin. The government sets editorial policy at state-owned television stations, which dominate the media landscape and generate propagandistic content.[288]
In April 2016, WikiLeaks tweeted criticism of the Panama Papers, which had among other things revealed Russian businesses and individuals linked with offshore ties (Vladimir Putin's associates had as much as $2 billion in offshore accounts).[289][273] The WikiLeaks Twitter account tweeted, "#PanamaPapers Putin attack was produced by OCCRP which targets Russia & former USSR and was funded by USAID and [George] Soros".[24] Putin would later go on to dismiss the Panama Papers by citing WikiLeaks: "WikiLeaks has showed us that official people and official organs of the U.S. are behind this."[24] According to The New York Times, both Assange claims are substance-free: "there is no evidence suggesting that the United States government had a role in releasing the Panama Papers."[290] Assange also falsely asserted that the Panama Papers gave Western figures a free pass, when the leaks in fact reported on a number of high-profile Western politicians, including UK Prime Minister David Cameron.[273]
In 2012 when WikiLeaks began to run out of funds, Assange began to host a television show on Russia Today, Russia's state-owned news network.[291] Assange has never disclosed how much he or WikiLeaks were paid for his tv-show.[291]
After President Trump's National Security Advisor Michael T. Flynn resigned in February 2017 due to reports over his communications with Russian officials and subsequent lies over the content and nature of those communications, WikiLeaks tweeted that Flynn resigned "after destabilization campaign by U.S. spies, Democrats, press."[292][293]
In April 2017, the WikiLeaks Twitter account suggested that the Khan Shaykhun chemical attack, which international human rights organisations and governments of the United States, United Kingdom, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, France, and Israel attributed to the Syrian government, was a false flag attack.[294] WikiLeaks stated that "while western establishment media beat the drum for more war in Syria the matter is far from clear", and shared a video by a Syrian activist who claimed that Islamist extremists were probably behind the chemical attack, not the Syrian government.[294]
In May 2017, cybersecurity experts stated that they believed that groups affiliated with the Russian government were involved in the hacking and leaking of e-mails associated with the Emmanuel Macron campaign; these e-mails were published on Pastebin but heavily promoted by WikiLeaks social media channels.[227][228][229]
In April 2017, CIA Director Mike Pompeo stated: "It is time to call out WikiLeaks for what it really is – a non-state hostile intelligence service often abetted by state actors like Russia." Pompeo said that the US Intelligence Community had concluded that Russia's "primary propaganda outlet," RT had "actively collaborated" with WikiLeaks.[295]
In August 2017, Foreign Policy reported that WikiLeaks had in the summer of 2016 turned down a large cache of documents containing information damaging to the Russian government.[273][296] WikiLeaks justified this by saying "As far as we recall these are already public ... WikiLeaks rejects all information that it cannot verify.[297] WikiLeaks rejects submissions that have already been published elsewhere".[273] Whereas news outlets had reported on some contents of the leaks in 2014, the information that news outlets reported on was less than half of the data that was made available to WikiLeaks in the summer of 2016.[273]
In October 2017, it was revealed that Cambridge Analytica, a company working on behalf of the Trump presidential campaign, had contacted WikiLeaks about missing Hillary Clinton e-mails and the possibility of creating a searchable database for the campaign to use.[298][299] After this was reported, Assange confirmed that WikiLeaks had been approached by Cambridge Analytica but had rejected the approach.[298][299] WikiLeaks did not disclose what the subject of Cambridge Analytica's approach was.[300]
WikiLeaks has been accused of anti-semitism.[301][302][303][304] The WikiLeaks Twitter account tweeted anti-semitic jibes.[303][304] The organisation has called out Jewish "lobbies" and claimed that a "Jewish conspiracy" is attempting to discredit the organisation.[301][305] In July 2016, WikiLeaks suggested that triple parentheses, or (((echoes))) – a tool used by neo-Nazis to identify Jews on Twitter, appropriated by Jews across the Twittersphere – had been used as a way for "establishment climbers" to identify one another.[302][304] Assange denied making claims of a Jewish conspiracy, stating, "'Jewish conspiracy' is completely false, in spirit and in word. It is serious and upsetting."[301]
In leaked internal conversations, WikiLeaks described a journalist as a "rat" and noted that "he's Jewish".[21] WikiLeaks also noted that the journalist had been "engaged" in the contesting anti-Semitic jibes on Twitter, and encouraged others to troll the journalist.[21]
WikiLeaks has been criticised for making misleading claims about the contents of its leaks.[306][307] Media outlets have also been criticised for reporting on WikiLeaks' claims about the CIA leak, which were later retracted.[306]
According to University of North Carolina Professor Zeynep Tufekci, this is part of a pattern of behaviour. After the 2016 Turkish coup d'état attempt, WikiLeaks announced that it would release e-mails belonging to Turkey's ruling conservative Justice and Development Party. WikiLeaks released Turkish emails and documents as a response to the Turkish government's crackdown on real or alleged government opponents that followed the coup attempt.[186] When these e-mails were released, however, it "was nothing but mundane mailing lists of tens of thousands of ordinary people who discussed politics online. Back then, too, the ruse worked: Many Western journalists had hyped these non-leaks."[306] According to Tufekci, there are three steps to WikiLeaks' "disinformation campaigns": "The first step is to dump many documents at once — rather than allowing journalists to scrutinise them and absorb their significance before publication. The second step is to sensationalise the material with misleading news releases and tweets. The third step is to sit back and watch as the news media unwittingly promotes the WikiLeaks agenda under the auspices of independent reporting."[306]
WikiLeaks has drawn criticism for violating the personal privacy of a multitude of individuals and inadequately curating its content. These critics include transparency advocates, such as Edward Snowden, the Sunlight Foundation and the Federation of American Scientists.[25]
WikiLeaks has published individuals' Social Security numbers, medical information, and credit card numbers.[26] An analysis by the Associated Press found that WikiLeaks had in one of its mass-disclosures published "the personal information of hundreds of people – including sick children, rape victims and mental health patients".[26] WikiLeaks has named teenage rape victims, and outed an individual arrested for homosexuality in Saudi Arabia.[26] Some of WikiLeaks' cables "described patients with psychiatric conditions, seriously ill children or refugees".[26] An analysis of WikiLeaks' Saudi cables "turned up more than 500 passport, identity, academic or employment files ... three dozen records pertaining to family issues in the cables – including messages about marriages, divorces, missing children, elopements and custody battles. Many are very personal, like the marital certificates that reveal whether the bride was a virgin. Others deal with Saudis who are deeply in debt, including one man who says his wife stole his money. One divorce document details a male partner's infertility. Others identify the partners of women suffering from sexually transmitted diseases including HIV and Hepatitis C."[26] Two individuals named in the DNC leaks were targeted by identity thieves following WikiLeaks' reveal of their Social Security and credit card information.[26] In its leak of DNC e-mails, WikiLeaks revealed the details of an ordinary staffer's suicide attempt and brought attention to it through a tweet.[308][309]
WikiLeaks' publishing of Sony's hacked e-mails drew criticism for violating the privacy of Sony's employees and for failing to be in the public interest.[310][311] Michael A. Cohen, a fellow at the Century Foundation, argues that "data dumps like these represent a threat to our already shrinking zone of privacy."[310] He noted that the willingness of WikiLeaks to publish information of this type encourages hacking and cybertheft: "With ready and willing amplifiers, what's to deter the next cyberthief from stealing a company's database of information and threatening to send it to Wikileaks if a list of demands aren't met?"[310]
The Sunlight Foundation, a nonprofit that advocates for open government, has criticised WikiLeaks for inadequate curation of its content and for "weaponised transparency," writing that with the DNC leaks, "Wikileaks again failed the due diligence review we expect of putatively journalistic entities when it published the personal information of ordinary citizens, including passport and Social Security numbers contained in the hacked emails of Democratic National Committee staff. We are not alone in raising ethical questions about Wikileaks' shift from whistleblower to platform for weaponised transparency. Any organisation that 'doxxes' a public is harming privacy."[312] The manner in which WikiLeaks publishes content can have the effect of censoring political enemies: "Wikileaks' indiscriminate disclosure in this case is perhaps the closest we've seen in reality to the bogeyman projected by enemies to reform — that transparency is just a Trojan Horse for chilling speech and silencing political enemies."[312]
In July 2016, Edward Snowden criticised WikiLeaks for insufficiently curating its content.[27] When Snowden made data public, he did so by working with the Washington Post, the Guardian and other news organisations, choosing only to make documents public which exposed National Security Agency surveillance programs.[27] Content that compromised national security or exposed sensitive personal information was withheld.[27] WikiLeaks, on the other hand, makes little effort to remove sensitive personal information or withhold content with adverse national security implications. WikiLeaks responded by accusing Snowden of pandering to Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.[27]
University of North Carolina Professor Zeynep Tufekci has criticised WikiLeaks for exposing sensitive personal information: "WikiLeaks, for example, gleefully tweeted to its millions of followers that a Clinton Foundation employee had attempted suicide ... Data dumps by WikiLeaks have outed rape victims and gay people in Saudi Arabia, private citizens' emails and personal information in Turkey, and the voice mail messages of Democratic National Committee staff members."[28] She argues these data dumps which violate personal privacy without being in the public interest "threaten our ability to dissent by destroying privacy and unleashing a glut of questionable information that functions, somewhat unexpectedly, as its own form of censorship, rather than as a way to illuminate the maneuverings of the powerful."[28]
In January 2017, the WikiLeaks Task Force, a Twitter account associated with WikiLeaks,[313] proposed the creation of a database to track verified Twitter users, including sensitive personal information on individuals' homes, families and finances.[314][313][315] According to the Chicago Tribune, "the proposal faced a sharp and swift backlash as technologists, journalists and security researchers slammed the idea as a 'sinister' and dangerous abuse of power and privacy."[314] Twitter furthermore bans the use of Twitter data for "surveillance purposes," stating "Posting another person's private and confidential information is a violation of the Twitter rules."[313]
Within WikiLeaks, there has been public disagreement between founder and spokesperson Julian Assange and Daniel Domscheit-Berg, the website's former German representative who was suspended by Assange. Domscheit-Berg announced on 28 September 2010 that he was leaving the organisation due to internal conflicts over management of the website.[97][316][317]
On 25 September 2010, after being suspended by Assange for "disloyalty, insubordination and destabilisation", Daniel Domscheit-Berg, the German spokesman for WikiLeaks, told Der Spiegel that he was resigning, saying "WikiLeaks has a structural problem. I no longer want to take responsibility for it, and that's why I am leaving the project."[318][319][320] Assange accused Domscheit-Berg of leaking information to Newsweek, claiming the WikiLeaks team was unhappy with Assange's management and handling of the Afghan war document releases.[320] Daniel Domscheit-Berg wanted greater transparency in the articles released to the public. Another vision of his was to focus on providing technology that allowed whistle-blowers to protect their identity as well as a more transparent way of communicating with the media, forming new partnerships and involving new people.[321] Domscheit-Berg left with a small group to start OpenLeaks, a new leak organisation and website with a different management and distribution philosophy.[318][322]
While leaving, Daniel Domscheit-Berg copied and then deleted roughly 3,500 unpublished documents from the WikiLeaks servers,[323] including information on the US government's 'no-fly list' and inside information from 20 right-wing organisations, and according to a WikiLeaks statement, 5 gigabytes of data relating to Bank of America, the internal communications of 20 neo-Nazi organisations and US intercept information for "over a hundred Internet companies".[324] In Domscheit-Berg's book he wrote: "To this day, we are waiting for Julian to restore security, so that we can return the material to him, which was on the submission platform."[325] In August 2011, Domscheit-Berg claims he permanently deleted the files "in order to ensure that the sources are not compromised."[326]
Herbert Snorrason, a 25-year-old Icelandic university student, resigned after he challenged Assange on his decision to suspend Domscheit-Berg and was bluntly rebuked.[320] Iceland MP Birgitta Jónsdóttir also left WikiLeaks, citing lack of transparency, lack of structure, and poor communication flow in the organisation.[327] According to the periodical The Independent (London), at least a dozen key supporters of WikiLeaks left the website during 2010.[328]
Those working for WikiLeaks are reportedly required to sign sweeping non-disclosure agreements covering all conversations, conduct, and material, with Assange having sole power over disclosure.[329] The penalty for non-compliance in one such agreement was reportedly £12 million.[329] WikiLeaks has been challenged for this practice, as it seen to be hypocritical for an organisation dedicated to transparency to limit the transparency of its inner workings and limit the accountability of powerful individuals in the organisation.[329][330][331]
On April 20, 2018, the Democratic National Committee filed a multimillion-dollar lawsuit in federal district court in Manhattan against Russia, the Trump campaign, WikiLeaks and Julian Assange, alleging a conspiracy to disrupt the 2016 United States presidential election in Trump's favor.[332] WikiLeaks called the lawsuit a "publicity stunt" by the DNC and said, "As an accurate publisher of newsworthy information @WikiLeaks is constitutionally protected from such suits." WikiLeaks added that they were considering filing a countersuit against the DNC.[333]
WikiLeaks has received praise as well as criticism. The organisation won a number of awards in its early years, including The Economist's New Media Award in 2008 at the Index on Censorship Awards[334] and Amnesty International's UK Media Award in 2009.[335][336] In 2010, the New York Daily News listed WikiLeaks first among websites "that could totally change the news,"[337] and Julian Assange received the Sam Adams Award[338] and was named the Readers' Choice for TIME's Person of the Year in 2010.[339] The UK Information Commissioner has stated that "WikiLeaks is part of the phenomenon of the online, empowered citizen."[340] During its first days, an Internet petition in support of WikiLeaks attracted more than six hundred thousand signatures.[341]
Sympathisers of WikiLeaks in the media and academia commended it during its early years for exposing state and corporate secrets, increasing transparency, assisting freedom of the press, and enhancing democratic discourse while challenging powerful institutions.[342][343][344][345][346][347][348] In 2010, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights expressed concern over the "cyber war" being led at the time against WikiLeaks,[349] and in a joint statement with the Organization of American States the UN Special Rapporteur called on states and other people to keep international legal principles in mind.[350]
Several Republicans who had once been highly critical of WikiLeaks and Julian Assange began to speak fondly of him after WikiLeaks published the DNC leaks and started to regularly criticise Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party.[351][352] Having called WikiLeaks "disgraceful" in 2010, President-Elect Donald Trump praised WikiLeaks in October 2016, saying, "I love WikiLeaks."[353][354] Newt Gingrich, who called for Assange to be "treated as an enemy combatant" in 2010, praised him as a "down to Earth, straight forward interviewee" in 2017.[351] Sean Hannity, who had in 2010 said that Assange waged a "war" on the United States, praised him in 2016 for showing "how corrupt, dishonest and phony our government is".[352] Sarah Palin, who had in 2010 described Assange as an "anti-American operative with blood on his hands", lavished praise on him in 2017.[355] Ann Coulter called for Assange to be awarded the presidential medal of freedom.[351]
At the same time, several US government officials have criticised WikiLeaks for exposing classified information and claimed that the leaks harm national security and compromise international diplomacy.[356][357][358][359][360] Several human rights organisations requested with respect to earlier document releases that WikiLeaks adequately redact the names of civilians working with international forces, to prevent repercussions.[361] Some journalists have likewise criticised a perceived lack of editorial discretion when releasing thousands of documents at once and without sufficient analysis.[362] In 2016, Harvard law professor and Electronic Frontier Foundation board member Jonathan Zittrain argued that a culture in which one constantly risks being "outed" as a result of virtual Watergate-like break-ins (or violations of the Fourth Amendment) could lead people to hesitate to speak their minds.[363]
In April 2017, CIA Director Mike Pompeo called WikiLeaks "a non-state hostile intelligence service often abetted by state actors like Russia".[364]
Also in April 2017, Attorney General Jeff Sessions stated that arresting Julian Assange of WikiLeaks was a priority: "We have professionals that have been in the security business of the United States for many years that are shocked by the number of leaks and some of them are quite serious. So yes, it is a priority. We've already begun to step up our efforts and whenever a case can be made, we will seek to put some people in jail."[365]
In 2011, hacktivist group Anonymous published a secret proposal presented by a Palantir Technologies employee to Hunton & Williams, a Washington, D.C. law firm, to attempt to discredit WikiLeaks and supporters such as Glenn Greenwald with disinformation and cyberattacks.[366] Two other private security firms, Berico Technologies and HBGary, were also involved in the proposal.[367][368][369][370] Palantir temporarily suspended the employee, its CEO Alex Karp apologised to Greenwald, and a spokesperson said the company would have collapsed if it had carried out the proposal.[366]
Release of United States diplomatic cables was followed by the creation of a number of other organisations based on the WikiLeaks model.[371]
A thriller about WikiLeaks was released in the United States on 18 October 2013. The documentary We Steal Secrets: The Story of WikiLeaks by director Alex Gibney premiered at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival.[382] War, Lies and Videotape is a documentary by French directors Paul Moreira and Luc Hermann from press agency Premieres Lignes. The film was first released in France, in 2011 and then broadcast worldwide.[383] The Source is a 2014 oratorio by Ted Hearne, with a libretto by Mark Doten that features WikiLeaks document disclosures by Chelsea Manning.[384]

The importance of the National Security Agency (“NSA”) leaked documents cannot be overstated.  I have been writing about voter registration and elections system hacking in the 2016 Primary and General Election for several months now and have surveyed following states related to these issues: Arizona, Alabama, Alaska, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida’s primary election, Florida’s general election, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, & Indiana. In many of these states, we have found evidence which matches up with this prior analysis and helps to answer some unanswered questions. The above states help point to the likely route of transmission from the source of hacking to the voting machines themselves. There is only one final piece which needs to be conducted, and this is a forensic analysis of the machines. Brent Turner, Secretary of the National Association of Voting Officials (“NAVO”) has already asked for a forensic analysis from all 50 states, however, no state has yet permitted NAVO to conduct such an analysis.Route of Virus TransmissionThe importance of the NSA document is that it provides proof of actual malicious virus infiltration into the voting systems, beginning at the vendor level. The document explains that the Russian General Staff Main Intelligence Directorate (Russian military unit) attempted to and successfully infiltrated an elections systems company using phishing emails. VR Systems, an elections system vendor, is mentioned, but not identified as the hacked company in the NSA document. VR Systems is an election systems vendor, based out of Tallahassee, Florida which operates in California, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, New York, North Carolina, Virginia, and West Virginia.VR Systems released the following statement in response to requests for comment by the media:http://www.rubenmajor.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/security.pdfPhishing YouTube VideoInfection of the election vendor’s computer system was accomplished by the user opening up emails which contained Word Documents that had viruses embedded in them. Once clicked, the virus extracted and was so powerful that it could give Total Access to whoever was doing the hacking. The entire process is described below:http://www.rubenmajor.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/NSA-Report.pdfAfter this was accomplished, hackers obtained over 120 email addresses for various election officials. It is not clear which election officials are affected. Wayne County, Indiana Clerk Debra Berry explained that she received information from VR Systems that Florida was the primary target, however, this has not stopped other election officials in different states from conducting an analysis. Currently, there is an on-going analysis of the election systems in various counties throughout the U.S.There is no specific documentation other than Clerk Berry’s statement which explains where these election officials were located or if the leaked document describes an event limited to a particular geographic location. There is also no mention how many election officials were actually affected by the virus. It is import to note, however, that if any election official were infected, it could result in Total Access to their computer. Considering the scope of the operation and historical analysis of Russian hacking, it is likely that the attack was not limited to one election systems vendor but rather an extensive use of bot networks, which could send out numerous requests. The NSA document explains that the Word Document sends out a beacon when a computer is infected, most likely so a real human user can access the computer itself.DDOS/Bot NetworksDDOS attacks are those which overwhelm a computer with repeated requests over and over until the server/computer shuts down. Bot networks can infiltrate massive numbers of servers/computers over many networks. The hacking tools discussed above had the ability to both bypass firewalls and inject malicious viruses everywhere. These tools could have been used to hit many different servers/computers across the country where election workers were unwittingly harboring a virus. From Election Official Computers to Voting MachinesWhat makes this highly concerning is that if a hacker were to have complete access to the election system as an administrator, they could easily implant a virus on the computer that might reprogram the voting machines either prior to the election through removable media (such as a USB stick) infected with the virus that could change vote counts at some point.There is no need for voting machines to be connected to the internet to get infected. Andrew Appel, a computer scientist at Princeton University explains: ”“To hack a voting machine remotely, you might think it has to be plugged in to the Internet.  Most voting machines are never plugged directly into the Internet.  But all voting machines must accept electronic input files from other computers: these “ballot definition files” tell the vote-counting program which candidates are on the ballot.These files are transferred to the voting machine, before each election, by inserting a cartridge or memory card into the voting machine.  These cartridges are prepared on an Election Management System (EMS) computer.  If that computer is hacked, then it can prepare fraudulent ballot-definition cartridges.  Are those EMS computers ever connected to the Internet?  Most of them probably are…”This could all happen without an election officials knowledge. It is important to ask the question:“why would the Russians stop at the election officials computer and not make a change to the actual vote count?”There would be no benefit to going at the extreme length of setting everything up, but stopping short of finishing the job. If anything, it is absolutely necessary for the forensic analysis of the voting machines to take place in order to maintain Integrity of our election system. For far too long the systems have been vulnerable to hacking.If the virus could give TOTAL Access to the election system vendors and/or officials, why would #RussianHacking stop short of the machines?— Ruben Major, JD, MA (@rubenkmajor) June 9, 2017Additionally some State contracts prevent people from being able to conduct forensic analysis of the voting machines.http://www.rubenmajor.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Letter_to_Louisianared2-1.pdfThese are simply unacceptable results which need to change in order for people to be represented in a true democracy.#unhackthevote
We can’t review the machines it is in our contract. Why? Only one answer. https://t.co/DX85UAfKy0— MikeFarb (@mikefarb1) June 9, 2017Leon County Florida Hacking DemonstrationIn January of 2016 Dan Sinclare, Leon County, Florida Elections Supervisor Candidate and Dave Levin with Vanguard Cyber Security presented a short demonstration of how Levin was able to hack into the county election systems in Florida and found numerous problems with the security of the system.It was incredibly easy for the Levin to get in and accomplish anything that the administrator was able to accomplish. He explained that “you be from Siberia and perform” the attack on the system. While Levin’s actions are considered by many to be White Hat Techniques, that did not deter his criminal prosecution for the act. He was later sentenced to 20 days in jail.What’s important about this particular video has that it shows in real-time format how Hacker’s likely would have used state election officials credentials in order to do whatever the administrator could have done in the systems. It is important to note, that administrators had the responsibility of uploading and downloading candidate information as well as results to and from the administrators computer and the voting machines themselves. This is important because it demonstrates again, the route of transmission of the virus to the vote count systems. If an election official’s computer used for these actions was compromised with this virus, results could not be trusted.ArizonaVoter registration systems were extensively targeted throughout the country as I have detailed in numerous reports. It is important to note that an attack on the voter registration systems is an attack on the vote count. In analyzing the NSA document reported above, it is important to note several issues in Arizona starting before the primary where voters were kicked off the rolls. Arizona Secretary of State, Michelle Reagan gave testimony accepting that there had been alterations of both Republican and Democrat party affiliations on the voter rolls — where they were changed to “No Party Preference.” Her testimony appeared genuinely concerned, shocked, and heartfelt. The results were truly disturbing.Were these events related or was this part of another Russian hacking attempt? Either answer is concerning. The breach itself caused the FBI to issue a Flash Alert which was reported by Yahoo! on August 29, 2016. detailing a cyber analysis of the Arizona hacking incident.It turns out that hackers were actually able to install malicious software, prompting the state to take the machines down/offline for nine days. It is also important to note that on January 10, 2017, local news reported that numerous lawmakers’ computers have been infected with malware, of which one of the characteristics was to bring up a screen in Russian.The fact that election officials and lawmakers’ systems were breached, tends to lend credence to the fact that the most important systems were affected. This Arizona attack was previously identified as part of a phishing email infiltration. Because of the way that botnets work it is important to point out that sending out queries to lawmakers and election officials computers, as well as the voting systems themselves probably occurred widely throughout the country. Again, a transparent forensic analysis of the voting machines would help to answer this question ultimately.IllinoisThe next state to consider is Illinois. I have previously reported and Illinois and from what I have found the Illinois State Board of Elections (“SBE”) had come out with a report which detailed an analysis of the infiltration which occurred into it systems prior to the general election. This infiltration involved involved obtaining usernames and passwords of election officials as demonstrated in the SBE report below:http://www.rubenmajor.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Illinois-Voter-Registration-System-Database-Breach-Report.pdfIt is important that there is credential harvesting in this case. Illinois officials would have likely been hacked in a manner which would result in Total Access to the election systems by the hackers. This could have been a way to change the vote tallies as described above. Again this is highly concerning.Analysis/SolutionIt is important to point out that the information provided above provides a route of transmission of Russian hacking in the election from the source to the vote count systems which tends to discredit the results. These issues need to be shored up as soon as possible in order to prevent any future incidents there have already been calls for the information to be declassified so that states can begin the necessary work to fix their election systems.There is a solution to this problem which Mr. Turner, Brian Fox, and Dr. Juan Gilbert from the National Association of Voting Officials have demonstrated – See www.navo-us.org. This system advocates for complete and total transparency in the process. We need to make sure that the election systems are appropriately transparent so that the public has confidence in the system. General Public License Version 3 (GPLv3) open source ballot printing and tabulation systems have been tendered to the US government for public ownership and use, but have been kept on the sidelines by corporate led lobbyists.Prime III Demo from Wisconsin Elections Commission on Vimeo.This can no longer be tolerated as it is in direct conflict with the national security interest. The process is relatively simple. This process (1) begins with the voter  choosing the candidate which he or she would like to vote for. Then (2) a ballot is printed out and the voter verifies that the ballot matches the desired selection from the screen. The ballot is then (3) inserted into a privacy sleeve and (4) dropped into the ballot box where it is (5) counted at the end of voting. It is important to note that the count will occur at the end of the day and at the precinct where the vote was originally cast so that people from both parties, as well as voter, the media, and election officials can watch as the count begins to take place. The following video demonstrates how the system works:Once the counting begins, all of the ballots are announced then (6) scanned into a scanner and the scanning process is projected on a big screen in the public count center. The hand count (8) audit will take place immediately and the hand count will be (9) matched up to the electronic accounting system. If there is found to be a problem with the machine scanner, then the scanner will be thrown out. The hand count will be paramount. Transparency is key here. It is important to use open-source GPLv3 software, because it is not proprietary and does not contain any secret coding which would prevent the forensic analysis of the voting machines. Many reputable entities requiring the best security platform possible utilize open source software, in particular the Department of Defense and NASA which use the code for numerous platforms within their operational makeup.We deserve nothing less than to have transparency in the elections process as well as to have accountability. Voting officials, unfortunately can be reluctant to provide information related to deficiencies which may have occurred, but there is nothing more precious than a right to vote. If our right to vote is infringed upon, we will have no recourse and our democracy will no longer exist. There is no issue more important for our preservation as a shining example of freedom, than protecting our right to vote — we must continue this fight for our democracy.Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name * Email * Website  

Ruben MajorFollow10,85138,241Dad, CA SOS Candidate, #Paramedic, #Historian & Law Degree, CEO @emsuniversity & @emswire, Writer @progressivearmy #unhackthevote. RT/Like /= endorseNot just GA--many states are eroding voting rights. We must #RestoretheVRA! How Dismantling the Voting Rights Act Helped Georgia Discriminate Again
#MondayMotivation #California #RestoreTheVoteChat #BlueWave #MajorChange #Midterms2018
How Dismantling the Voting Rights Act Helped Georgia Discriminate AgainA decade ago, Georgia tried to implement a similar “exact-match” voter registration system but was thwarted by a key section of the Voting...flip.itMaryland voter registration and online voting vendor financed by Russian oligarch #SundayThoughts #SundayMorning

Maryland voter registration and online voting vendor financed by Russian oligarchMaryland voter registration and online voting vendor financed by Russian oligarchflip.itIt is insulting and unacceptable the way people in our government continue to discriminate against and disenfranchise indigenous people. | Many Native IDs Won't Be Accepted At North Dakota Polling Places #Voting #Midterms #Elections 

Many Native IDs Won't Be Accepted At North Dakota Polling PlacesThe Supreme Court has upheld a state law requiring voters' IDs to have street addresses, which many reservations do not use. Native American groups ar...flip.itRuben Major  4 hours ago Not just GA--many states are eroding voting rights. We must #RestoretheVRA! #MajorChange flip.it/DEA_Yw ... How Dismantling the Voting Rights Act Helped Georgia Discriminate Againflip.itRuben Major  1 day ago Maryland voter registration and online voting vendor financed by Russian oligarch flip.it/WEpkCc ... Maryland voter registration and online voting vendor financed by Russian ogliarchflip.itRuben Major  2 days ago It is insulting and unacceptable the way people in our government continue to discriminate against and disenfranchise indigenous people.  #Voting #Midterms #Elections flip.it/EnNBc5 ... Many Native IDs Won't Be Accepted At North Dakota Polling Placesflip.itThe California Political Reform Act (Proposition 34) places limits on contributions to candidates for state office and imposes certain prohibitions. This request does not seek a contribution in excess of applicable limits or from prohibited sources. An individual, corporation, union, PAC, and other entities may contribute a maximum of $7,300 to the committee per election, primary and general. A registered Small Contributor Committee may contribute a maximum of $14,600 per election. Contributions are not deductible for tax purposes. Paid for by Ruben Major for Secretary of State 2018. FPPC ID: 1399244
Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.Thank you. Please check your inbox to confirm.

PBS NewsHour


                    PBS NewsHour
                
Ransomware, a type of software that computer hackers use to hold individuals' data hostage by blocking access to files unless they agree to pay a ransom, is on the rise. And because anyone with an internet connection is vulnerable, the problem highlights a growing threat that consumers face on both their personal computers and mobile devices.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Inna Simone is retired, a mother and grandmother from Russia who now lives outside of Boston.  Last November, her home computer started acting strangely.INNA SIMONE:My computer was working terribly. It was not working, I mean, it was so slow.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:A few days later, while searching through her computer files, Inna saw dozens of these messages — they were all the same.  They read: "Your files are encrypted. To get the key to decrypt them, you have to pay $500 dollars."   Her exact deadline — December 2nd at 12:48 pm – was just a few days away.All her files were locked — tax returns, financial papers, letters — even the precious photos of her granddaughter zoe.  Inna couldn't open any of them.INNA SIMONE:It says, "If you won't pay, within one week or whatever, your fine will double. If you won't pay by then, all your files will be deleted and you will lose them forever and never will get back.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Inna Simone — like hundreds of thousands of others — had been victimized by what's known as a "ransomware" attack.   Hackers — who law enforcement believe come mainly from eastern Europe or Russia — manage to put malicious software onto a victim's  computer, often via an email attachment or a compromised website.  That software then allows the hackers to lock up your files — or your entire computer — until you pay them a ransom to give it back.  Ransom demands have ranged from a few hundred dollars to several hundred thousand.Justin Cappos is a computer security expert at New York University.JUSTIN CAPPOS:It will actually lock you out of the files, the data, on your computer.  So you'd be able to use the computer but those files have been encrypted by the attacker with a key that only they possess.  It's frustrating because you know the data is there.  You know the files are there.  You know your photos and everything is there and could be accessible to you.  But you have no way of being able to get at it because of this encryption that the attackers are using.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Inna was panicked.  Computer technicians were no help.  She didn't want to call the police… her husband at first said don't pay the ransom, but she wanted those files back.In their 'ransom note', the hackers wanted to be paid in bitcoin — the largely untraceable digital currency — and have it put into their anonymous account.  Inna had never heard of bitcoin, but the hackers, in one of their many touches of what you might call 'customer service,' provided all sorts of helpful facts and links and how-to guides about bitcoin.Alina Simone is Inna's daughter.ALINA SIMONE:If you see the ransom note you can see, oh, they try to reassure you about bitcoin.  We have got screen shots or here is a link to some kind of a guide that talks you through the whole process, and here's a list of providers with a little kind of yelp-like reviews next to each one that kind of explain their strength and weaknesses. It's incredibly sophisticated.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:After days of debate, Inna decided to pay.  She sent a money order to a bitcoin seller, but it was Thanksgiving, and a huge snowstorm hit Boston, which meant the check only arrived the afternoon before her deadline.  And, in that delay, bitcoin's exchange rate had changed, and now her check didn't cover the full $500 ransom – it was about $13 short.  Her last resort was this bitcoin ATM machine in Brooklyn, NY — conveniently not far from her daughter Alina's apartment.ALINA SIMONE:It's very kind of spooky looking ATM. It has no buttons. It just had a slot that you feed your money into.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Tuesday afternoon, the full ransom was sent to the hackers account.  But it was two hours late. Inna added one short message with her payment.INNA SIMONE:I wrote: "I wish you all will drop dead."WILLIAM BRANGHAM:The F.B.I. doesn't have complete data on how often these attacks occur. Computer security researchers estimate close to a million users have been hit globally during the last year.  One tech firm estimates that more than a quarter of victims pay the ransom, which cyber security experts discourage because they don't want to encourage more hacking.And it's not just individuals who get hit:  hackers have hit several local police stations.  We heard of law firms being targeted.  Even the city of Detroit had its data held for an 800,000 dollar ransom by hackers. The city didn't pay.SUPERINTENDENT TERRY VAN ZOEREN:When you think of a technology hack, you think of data or files that are being destroyed, or taken, ransomware, I learned, doesn't work the way.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Last month, Terry Van Zoeren had to learn all about ransomware when his southern New Jersey school district got hit.  Hackers compromised the entire district's computer system — causing problems with hard drives throughout the system:  administrators', those in the classrooms, the computers that processed kids' lunch payments, even the standardized tests that were going on when the hack occurred.SUPERINTENDENT TERRY VAN ZOEREN:We had to shut down student testing for a number of days until we got control of the PCs.  And there were 100s of PCs in the district.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Van Zoeren said the hackers demanded 500 bitcoin, which at the time was about $128,000 dollars in ransom.  School officials didn't pay (there's obviously no guarantee paying up gets your data back.)   Instead, they called the local police.  School officials says no student or parent data was stolen, and after a costly, elaborate rebuilding of their network, they were able to get back up and running.NYU computer scientist Justin Cappos says hackers go after such seemingly small targets because they're pretty easy:  victims often inadvertently download the viruses themselves by clicking on those email attachments. Besides, he says, the risks of getting caught are low, and if you cast a wide enough net, you'll get something.JUSTIN CAPPOS:When you go fishing, you don't try to catch every fish in the ocean.  You only wanna catch some.  And if you catch enough of them, then it's been a profitable trip for you.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:When her mom got hacked, Alina Simone — who's a journalist by day — did some research into ransomware for a piece she wrote for the New York Times.  She says it's alarming how organized and easy it is to carry out these kinds of attacks.ALINA SIMONE:There are people making viruses, selling viruses. There are distributors whose specialty is distributing viruses. These perpetrators, they don't have to know a line of code. They can just buy a virus and then hire a distributor and send it out.  And it's kind of just an off the shelf, you know—WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Wow. Plug and play corruption.ALINA SIMONE:Right. And so that's sort of the scariest thing that, just one person can just unleash all of this chaos and malice on the world with very little effort.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Her mom's story, however, wasn't over.  Inna had paid the hackers $500 — but rather than releasing her files as promised — they sent her this message.  It said "You did not pay in time for decryption."  Remember, she'd paid two hours late — now the hackers doubled the ransom to $1000, gave her another deadline, and said if she missed this one, they'd delete everything.INNA SIMONE:If you won't pay by then, all your files are gone forever.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Using a message board the hackers provided (another customer-friendly touch) Inna pleaded with the people she'd previously told to 'drop dead:' "We had a snowstorm" … "It was a holiday" and lastly: "I am only two hours late!"INNA SIMONE:So first I sent them about all these obstacles and the fact that I was only two hours late and this is really harsh.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:Did this feel strange that you're trying to communicate to a group of criminals — who knows where they are in the world — saying "You don't understand… the post office, the snow, Thanksgiving, the long weekend…"  I mean you must've felt–INNA SIMONE:But what else?  I mean, this is the only option. It's either this or nothing.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:You didn't think it would work.INNA SIMONE:Absolutely not.WILLIAM BRANGHAM:But later that day, the hackers released her files in full.Watch the Full EpisodeApr 18By PBS NewsHour

PBS NewsHour


                    PBS NewsHour
                

Support Provided By:
Learn more
Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.Thank you. Please check your inbox to confirm.Additional Support Provided By:
Read
May 11
North Carolina denied 99 percent of federal recovery funds for Hurricane Matthew

Read
Feb 16
Column: This is what happens when you take Ayn Rand seriously

Watch
Oct 15
Amy Walter and Tamara Keith on President Trump’s shifting campaign strategy

Watch
Oct 15
The fall of a retail icon: why Americans stopped shopping at Sears

Watch
Oct 15
’22 July’ explores the deadliest attacks in Norway since WW2

World
Oct 15
By Gregory Katz, Rod McGuirk, Associated Press
Nation
Oct 15
By Associated Press
Nation
Oct 15
By Joshua Barajas, Erica R. Hendry
Nation
Oct 15
By Maea Lenei Buhre
Nation
Oct 15
By Deb Reichmann, Darlene Superville, Associated Press
Economy
Oct 15
By Josh Boak, Associated Press
Arts
Oct 15
By Elizabeth Flock
Politics
Oct 15
By Michael Balsamo, Associated Press
Politics
Oct 15
By Associated Press
Economy
Oct 15
By Anne D'Innocenzio, Associated Press
Politics
Oct 15
By Associated Press
World
Oct 15
By Hope Yen, Jill Colvin, Associated Press
Politics
Oct 15
By Steve Peoples, Associated Press
Nation
Oct 14
By Russ Bynum, Brendan Farrington, Associated Press
World
Oct 14
By Robert Burns, Associated Press
Science
Oct 14
By Andrew Joseph, STAT
Nation
Oct 14
By Nomaan Merchant, Claudia Lauer, Associated Press
World
Oct 14
By Jon Gambrell, Associated Press
World
Oct 13
By Zeynep Bilginsoy, Jon Gambrell, Associated Press
Nation
Oct 13
By Collin Binkley, Associated Press© 1996 - 2018 NewsHour Productions LLC. All Rights Reserved.SectionsAboutStay ConnectedSubscribe to ‘Here's the Deal,’ our politics newsletterThank you. Please check your inbox to confirm.Learn more about Friends of the NewsHour.Support for NewsHour Provided By

					Posted by HIPAA Journal on Oct 12, 2018					Novato, CA-based Biomarin Pharmaceutical has discovered two employee email accounts have been compromised as a result of a phishing attack in which a temporary employee’s login credentials were obtained by the attacker. The attack was discovered on June 21, 2018 and immediate action was taken to prevent further unauthorized account access. The investigation into the breach determined...
					Posted by HIPAA Journal on Oct 12, 2018					The Minnesota Department of Human Services has mailed letters to approximately 21,000 individuals on medical assistance to alert them to a possible breach of their protected health information (PHI) due to two recent phishing attacks. Two DHS employees’ email accounts have been confirmed as having been compromised as a result of the employees clicking on links in phishing emails. The...
					Posted by HIPAA Journal on Oct 9, 2018					Michigan Medicine is notifying more than 3,600 patients of an impermissible disclosure of a limited amount of their protected health information. In early September 2018, the Michigan Medicine Development Office launched a fundraising campaign that involved sending letters to a large number of its patients. A third-party vendor was contracted to print the letters for the mailing and...
					Posted by HIPAA Journal on Oct 8, 2018					A lawsuit filed by Lambda Legal on behalf of a victim of a data breach that saw the highly sensitive protected health information of 93 lower-income HIV positive individuals stolen by unauthorized individuals has survived a motion to dismiss. The former administrator of the California AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP), A.J. Boggs & Company, submitted a motion to dismiss but it...Our HIPAA breach news section covers HIPAA breaches such as unauthorized disclosures of protected health information (PHI), improper disposal of PHI, unauthorized PHI access by cybercriminals and rogue healthcare employees, and other security and privacy breaches.When known, we explain how the breach occurred, the consequences to patients that may have had their PHI compromised, and the actions being taken by the affected healthcare organization to improve safeguards to prevent further HIPAA breaches.We also explain any actions being taken by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights (OCR) and state attorneys general in relation to those breaches.OCR investigates all data breaches that impact more than 500 individuals to determine whether any HIPAA violations have occurred. When HIPAA Rules are discovered to have been violated, financial penalties may be deemed appropriate. It can take many months or years before any financial penalties for HIPAA breaches are decided. Financial penalties for HIPAA violations tend to be reserved for the most serious breaches of HIPAA Rules. OCR prefers to resolve cases with voluntary compliance and by issuing recommendations to bring policies in line with HIPAA Rules.The HIPAA breach news section is particularly relevant to healthcare information security professionals, privacy officers, and other individuals who have some responsibility for HIPAA compliance.The HIPAA breach news reports highlight common areas of non-compliance and new attack vectors used by cybercriminals to gain access to healthcare networks and PHI, the security failings that allowed them to happen, and the measures that have been implemented to prevent them from happening again.No healthcare organization wants to experience a data breach, but when a breach does occur, lessons can be learned. HIPAA-covered entities can use these breach examples to help train their staff as well as to discover some of the methods other covered entities have adopted to improve data security.As you will be able to see from the volume of posts in the HIPAA breach news category, healthcare data breaches occur frequently. In 2016 and 2017, healthcare data breaches have been reported on an almost daily basis.Our HIPAA breach news section is an important source of information about potential security issues that covered entities should be identifying when conducting their own risk assessments. Many of the situations in our HIPAA breach news posts could have been avoided if a risk assessment had identified a vulnerability that was later exploited to gain access to PHI.The main purpose for adding HIPAA breach news to this website is to highlight specific aspects of HIPAA compliance that are commonly overlooked, often with serious consequences for the covered entity and patients/health plan members.By raising awareness of the volume of healthcare data breaches, the implications of those breaches, and the penalties that can result, it is hoped that healthcare providers will take decisive action to prevent their patients’ and members’ data from being exposed.The most recent healthcare data breach reports are listed below. If you want to find out if a specific covered entity has experienced a data breach, please use the search function in the top right hand corner of this webpage.Posted By HIPAA Journal on Oct 12, 2018Novato, CA-based Biomarin Pharmaceutical has discovered two employee email accounts have been compromised as a result of a phishing attack in which a temporary employee’s login credentials were obtained by the attacker. The attack was discovered on June 21, 2018 and immediate action was taken to prevent further unauthorized account access. The investigation into the breach determined that the email accounts had been accessed by an unauthorized individual, but it was not possible to tell whether any emails were opened or copied by the attacker. An analysis of the compromised accounts suggests a document containing names, health insurance information and Social Security numbers may have been in one or both email accounts at the time the breach. Due to the nature of exposed data, affected individuals have been advised to place a fraud alert on their credit files as a precaution against identity theft and fraud and urged to monitor explanation of benefits statements from insurers for medical services which have not been received. Biomarin Pharmaceutical has now secured its network and...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Oct 12, 2018The Minnesota Department of Human Services has mailed letters to approximately 21,000 individuals on medical assistance to alert them to a possible breach of their protected health information (PHI) due to two recent phishing attacks. Two DHS employees’ email accounts have been confirmed as having been compromised as a result of the employees clicking on links in phishing emails. The investigation into the breach determined that the attackers accessed both email accounts although it was not possible to determine which, if any, emails in the account had been accessed or copied by the attackers. Minnesota DHS has reason to believe that other employees may also have been targeted and could also have clicked on links in phishing emails, but it has not yet been confirmed whether their accounts have been breached. The investigation into the phishing attacks is ongoing. The two email account breaches occurred on June 28 and July 9, 2018, although the IT department only determined that the accounts had been breached in August. Upon discovery of the phishing attack, both accounts were...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Oct 9, 2018Michigan Medicine is notifying more than 3,600 patients of an impermissible disclosure of a limited amount of their protected health information. In early September 2018, the Michigan Medicine Development Office launched a fundraising campaign that involved sending letters to a large number of its patients. A third-party vendor was contracted to print the letters for the mailing and while many of the letters were printed correctly, an error was made by the printing company that resulted in an impermissible disclosure of certain patients’ personal information. According to Michigan Medicine, the error was introduced when the printing company installed new software. As a result of the error, a proportion of the letters contained information that was intended for other Michigan Medicine patients and did not match the name and address on the outside of the envelope. Since this was a fundraising mailing, the letters did not contain any medical information, Social Security numbers, financial data, or other highly sensitive information. Patients affected by the error has their name,...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Oct 8, 2018A lawsuit filed by Lambda Legal on behalf of a victim of a data breach that saw the highly sensitive protected health information of 93 lower-income HIV positive individuals stolen by unauthorized individuals has survived a motion to dismiss. The former administrator of the California AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP), A.J. Boggs & Company, submitted a motion to dismiss but it was recently rejected by the Superior Court of California in San Francisco. In the lawsuit, Lambda Legal alleges A.J. Boggs & Company violated the California AIDS Public Health Records Confidentiality Act, the California Confidentiality of Medical Information Act, and other state medical privacy laws by failing to ensure an online system was secure prior to implementing that system and allowing patients to enter sensitive information. A.J. Boggs & Company made its new online enrollment system live on July 1, 2016, even though it had previously received several warnings from nonprofits and the LA County Department of Health that the system had not been tested for vulnerabilities. It was...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Oct 8, 2018Camarillo, CA-based Gold Coast Health Plan is informing approximately 37,000 plan members that some of their protected health information has potentially been obtained by hackers who succeeded in compromising the email account of one of its employees. The employee was fooled by a phishing email and the attackers gained access to the email account on June 18, 2018. Access remained possible until August 1, 2018. Gold Coast Health Plan discovered the security breach on August 8 and took steps to secure the account and prevent any further remote access. A leading third-party cybersecurity firm was engaged to conduct an investigation into the breach and assess the scope of the incident and determine whether any patients’ health information was accessed. It was not possible to rule out PHI access and data theft with 100% certainty, although no reports have been received to date that suggest any PHI in the account has been misused. Gold Coast Health Plan believes the attack was financially motivated and the purpose of the attackers was to gain access to banking information in order to...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Oct 5, 2018A round up of healthcare data breaches recently announced by healthcare providers and business associates of HIPAA covered entities. Tillamook Chiropractic Clinic Discovers 26-Month Malware Infection The medical records of 4,058 patients of the Tillamook Chiropractic Clinic in Tillamook, OR have been stolen as a result of a malware infection. On August 3, 2018, the clinic conducted an internal security audit which showed that malware had been installed on its network, even though a firewall was in place, antivirus and antimalware software were installed and up to date, and its software was fully patched. An investigation into the security breach revealed the malware had been installed on May 24, 2016 and had remained undetected for 26 months. The malware had been installed on the primary insurance billing system, which the clinic reports was used as a staging area by the attackers to collect patient records before exfiltrating the data. The information believed to have been stolen includes full names, home addresses, work addresses, dates of birth, phone numbers, diagnoses, lab...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Oct 3, 2018Paperwork containing the protected health information of approximately 1,800 patients has been discovered abandoned in a Midtown, Houston street by an employee of the CBS-affiliated television station KBOU 11. The paperwork contained information such as patients’ names, birth dates, diagnoses, treatment information, medications, vital signs, and admission dates. KBOU launched an investigation into the breach and determined the paperwork related to patients from five Houston hospitals – MD Anderson Cancer Center, LBJ Hospital, Children’s Memorial Hermann, Memorial Hermann Hospital, and TIRR Memorial Hermann. The investigation led to UT Health. According to the report, the records were stolen from the locked trunk of a vehicle belonging of a medical resident who, while studying at UT Health’s McGovern Medical School, had worked at the above hospitals. The records were stolen from his vehicle in July. Officials at UT Health confirmed to KBOU that they are aware of the breach. Reporters spoke to the medical graduate and confirmed that the incident had not been reported to the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 28, 2018There has been a 70% increase in healthcare data breaches between 2010 and 2017, according to a study conducted by two physicians at the Massachusetts General Hospital Center for Quantitative Health. The study, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association on September 25, involved a review of 2,149 healthcare data breaches reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights between 2010 and 2017. “While we conduct scientific programs designed to recognize the enormous research potential of large, centralized electronic health record databases, we designed this study to better understand the potential downsides for our patients – in this case the risk of data disclosure,” said Dr. Thomas McCoy Jr, director of research at Massachusetts General Hospital’s Center for Quantitative Health in Boston and lead author of the study. Every year, with the exception of 2015, the number of healthcare data breaches has increased, rising from 199 breaches in 2010 to 344 breaches in 2017. Those breaches have resulted in the loss, theft, exposure, or...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 27, 2018Claxton-Hepburn Medical Center, a not-for-profit 115-bed community hospital in Ogdensburg, NY, has fired several employees for accessing patient health records without authorization. The PHI breaches were discovered during an internal investigation. It is unclear whether that investigation was launched following a complaint that had been received or if the patient privacy violations were uncovered during a routine audit of PHI access logs – A requirement of HIPAA. Claxton-Hepburn Medical Center has not publicly disclosed how many employees were terminated over the violations, only reporting that all employees who purposely committed the acts were terminated. It is also currently unclear exactly how many patients’ PHI was breached. Claxton-Hepburn Medical Center has confirmed that training is given to all employees on the first day of employment detailing the requirements of HIPAA and the importance of protecting the privacy of patients. All employees are made aware that accessing patient health information is only permitted when PHI needs to be viewed to complete work duties or...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 27, 2018Aspire Health, a Nashville, TN-based provider of in-home services for patients diagnosed with serious illnesses, has experienced a phishing attack that resulted in the email account of an employee being accessed by an unauthorized individual. Once access to the email account was gained, the attacker forwarded 124 emails to an external email account. Several of the forwarded email messages contained the protected health information of patients and “confidential and proprietary information and files”. According to a statement issued by a spokesperson for Aspire Health, breach notification letters have already been sent to a “small handful” of its patients, although the exact number affected by the breach has not been disclosed. The data breach has yet to appear on the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights’ breach portal. As is the case with many phishing scams, an email was sent to the employee which contained a hyperlink to a website which requested login credentials. The website, created on August 28, 2018, is hosted in the Russian Federation and was...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 24, 2018Mass Memorial Health Care has been fined $230,000 by the Massachusetts attorney general for HIPAA failures related to two data breaches that exposed the protected health information (PHI) of more than 15,000 state residents. A lawsuit was filed against UMass Memorial Health Care in which attorney general Maura Healey claimed UMass Memorial Medical Group Inc., and UMass Memorial Medical Center Inc., failed to implement sufficient measures to protect patients’ sensitive health information. In two separate incidents, employees accessed and copied patient health information without authorization and used that information to open cell phone and credit card accounts in the victims’ names. It was also alleged that UMass Memorial Medical Group Inc., and UMass Memorial Medical Center Inc., were both aware of employee misconduct, yet failed to properly investigate complaints related to data breaches and discipline the employees concerned in a timely manner. Both entities also failed to ensure that patients’ PHI was properly safeguarded. These failures violated Massachusetts data security...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 21, 2018August was a much better month for the healthcare industry with fewer data breaches reported than in July. In August, 28 healthcare data breaches were reported to the HHS’ Office for Civil Rights, a 17.86% month-over-month reduction in data breaches. There was also a major reduction in the number of healthcare records that were exposed or stolen. In August, 623,688 healthcare records were exposed or stolen – A 267.56% reduction from August, when 2,292,522 healthcare records were breached. Causes of Healthcare Data Breaches in August 2018 Hacking incidents dominated the breach reports in August, accounting for 53.57% of all reported data breaches and 95.73% of all records exposed or disclosed in August. Eight of the top ten breaches were the result of hacks, malware, or ransomware attacks. Insider breaches are a major problem in the healthcare industry, more so than other verticals. In August there were nine insider breaches – 32.14% of the healthcare data breaches in August. Those breaches involved the unauthorized access or impermissible disclosure of 18,488 healthcare...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 20, 2018Three hospitals that allowed an ABC film crew to record footage of patients as part of the Boston Med TV series have been fined $999,000 by the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights (OCR) for violating Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Rules. This is the second HIPAA violation case investigated by OCR related to the Boston Med TV series. On April 16, 2016, New York Presbyterian Hospital settled its HIPAA violation case with OCR for $2.2 million to resolve the impermissible disclosure of PHI to the ABC film crew during the recording of the series and for failing to obtain consent from patients. Fines for Boston Medical Center, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, & Massachusetts General Hospital Boston Medical Center (BMC) settled its HIPAA violations with OCR for $100,000. OCR investigators determined that BMC had impermissibly disclosed the PHI of patients to ABC employees during production and filming of the TV series, violating 45 C.F.R. § 164.502(a). Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH) settled its HIPAA violations...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 20, 2018Ohio Living, a provider of life plan communities and home health services in Ohio, has discovered an unauthorized individual has gained access to the email accounts of some of its employees. Ohio Living detected suspicious activity related to an employee’s email account on July 10, 2018. An investigation was immediately launched, and a third-party computer forensics expert was hired to investigate the breach and determine how access to the account was gained. On July 19, 2018, Ohio Living was informed that several email accounts had been compromised on July 10 and that those accounts had been accessed by an unauthorized individual. It was not possible to determine whether any emails were opened or if any emails were downloaded by the attacker. A review of the compromised accounts revealed they contained the protected health information of 6,510 individuals. Upon discovery of the breach, passwords were reset on all accounts known to have been compromised and a full password reset was performed on all other employees’ email accounts. Ohio Living has also provided further training to...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 20, 2018A former employee of the emergency department of Brooklyn’s Kings County Hospital is alleged to have stolen the protected health information of at least 100 individuals while working at the hospital and disclosed that information to another individual using an encrypted smartphone app. Orlando Jemmott, 52, was employed at the hospital for 12 years between March 2006 and April 2018 and was given access to patient health records in order to complete his work duties. Jemmott was required to enter patient information into the hospital’s system such as demographic data and information on patients’ symptoms and health complaints. In June 2017, the FBI received a tip that Jemmott was stealing patient information and selling the data to another individual. The woman claimed the information was being sent via the WhatsApp encrypted messaging app. The woman took Jemmott’s mobile phone from his house and handed it over to the FBI along with a photo from his WhatsApp profile. A warrant was then obtained by the FBI to search the phone. The search revealed hundreds of communications between...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 19, 2018Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Rhode Island (BCBSRI) is alerting 1,567 plan members that some of their protected health information has been impermissibly disclosed by one of its business associates. A BCBSRI vendor was contracted to send explanation of benefits statements to plan members which contain summaries of the healthcare services members have received under their health plan. However, an error was made which resulted in statements being sent to incorrect individuals. The explanation of benefits statements included members’ BCBSRI ID number, their service provider(s), the service(s) provided, and the cost of the claims. The impermissible disclosure of PHI was attributed to an error made by the vendor when combining the explanation of benefits statements for certain individuals who are covered under the same policy. Combining the statements was intended to reduce the number of summaries received by some members. The error resulted in some explanation of benefits statements being incorrectly combined in the mid-July mailings, which resulted in the summaries being sent to...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 18, 2018Independence Blue Cross is notifying thousands of plan members that some of their protected health information has been exposed online and has potentially been accessed by unauthorized individuals. The Independence Blue Cross privacy office was informed about the exposed information on July 19 and immediately launched an investigation. A leading forensics investigation firm was hired to investigate the incident and establish whether any plan members’ information was accessed during the time it was exposed. Independence Blue Cross said an employee had uploaded a file containing plan members’ protected health information to a public facing website on April 23, 2018. The file remained accessible until July 20 when it was removed from the website. The information contained in the file was limited. No financial information or Social Security numbers were exposed. Affected plan members only had their name, diagnosis codes, provider information, date of birth, and information used for processing claims exposed. Despite a thorough investigation, it was not possible to determine whether any...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 17, 2018The HHS’ Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has investigated Fairview Southdale Hospital in Edina, MN over an alleged violation of patient privacy. The CMS confirmed that patients were videotaped during psychiatric evaluations in the emergency department without their knowledge or consent.  The hospital was cited for violating patient privacy. According to the Star Tribune, the CMS launched an investigation following a complaint from a patient who had been taken to the hospital for a psychiatric evaluation against her will in May 2017. The patient was escorted to the hospital as police officers were concerned about her state of mental health and feared she may cause harm to herself or others. After being released, the patient took legal action over her admission to the hospital and how she was treated by the police. As part of that lawsuit, the patient requested a copy of the security camera footage from the hospital. While the patient expected to receive a copy of the videotape from the front of the hospital showing her entering the facility, the videotape showed her...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 17, 2018The Fetal Diagnostic Institute of the Pacific (FDIP) in Honolulu, HI, experienced a ransomware attack on June 30, 2018. File-encrypting software was installed on an FDIP server and encrypted a wide range of file types, including patient medical records. FDIP engaged the services of a leading cybersecurity company to conduct a full investigation into the breach to determine whether patient data was accessed by the attackers and also to assist with breach remediation. The investigation did not uncover any evidence to suggest that patients’ protected health information was accessed, viewed, or stolen by the individuals behind the attack, although it was not possible to rule out data access and data theft with a high level of confidence. Consequently, the incident is being treated as a HIPAA breach, patients are being notified, and the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights (OCR) has been informed. An analysis of the files encrypted by the ransomware revealed they contained a range of protected health information. Patients affected by the security breach may...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 14, 2018Hopebridge, an Indiana-based network of 28 autism treatment centers throughout the Midwest, has discovered it has been the victim of a phishing attack that has potentially resulted in an unauthorized individual gaining access to the protected health information (PHI) of its patients. A security breach was detected on July 19, 2018 prompting a thorough investigation. A leading third-party computer forensics firm was engaged to assess the nature and scope of the breach and all accounts and systems were immediately secured to lock out the attacker. The investigation revealed several employees had been fooled by phishing emails that had been sent between March and July 2018. Several email accounts were compromised as a result of employees’ responses to those emails. An analysis of the compromised email accounts revealed they contained a limited amount of patients’ PHI – Their names, the services they received from Hopebridge, and an inferred autism diagnosis. The results of the forensic investigation suggest that it was not the intention of the attacker to gain access to PHI, instead...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 13, 2018A nurse at a Texas children’s hospital has been fired for violating Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Rules by posting protected health information on a social media website. The pediatric ICU/ER nurse worked at Texas Children’s Hospital and posted a series of comments on Facebook about a rare case of measles at the hospital. The nurse was an anti-vaxxer and posted about the experience of seeing a boy at the hospital suffering from the disease – a disease that could have been prevented through vaccination. Her comments explained how the disease was much worse that she expected it to be, having not encountered anyone with the measles in the past.  She explained that it was a “rough” experience seeing the boy suffering from the disease. She also explained in one of her posts, “I think it’s easy for us non-vaxxers to make assumptions, but most of us have never and will never see one of these diseases,” according to the Houston Chronicle, which obtained screenshots of her Facebook posts. “By no means have I changed my vax stance, and I never will. But this...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 12, 2018Acadiana Computer Services Inc., a Lafayette, LA-based provider of software and business solutions for the healthcare industry, has discovered an unauthorized individual has gained access to the email account of one of its employees. The security breach was detected on July 6, 2018 and external access to the account was immediately disabled. An independent cybersecurity expert was retained to conduct a forensic analysis of the breach and determine the nature and scope of the attack. An analysis of the emails in the compromised account revealed they contained the personal information of several of its clients’ patients. The information potentially accessed was limited to names, addresses, treatment information, billing information, and for a limited number of individuals, Social Security numbers. The breach report submitted to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights indicates 31,151 individuals have had their protected health information exposed as a result of the email account breach. Those individuals had previously received medical services from the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 10, 2018The Norwood, MA-based respiratory care provider Reliable Respiratory has experienced a phishing attack that has affected several thousand of its patients. A cyberattack was suspected on July 3, 2018, following the detection of unusual activity in an employee’s email account. An investigation was launched to determine the cause of that activity, which revealed the employee had been targeted with a phishing campaign. The response to a phishing email resulted in the disclosure of that individual’s login credentials. The unusual account activity was detected on July 3 and the account was immediately secured. Computer forensic specialists were retained to determine the nature and extent of the breach. The breach investigation confirmed that the account had been accessed by an unauthorized individual between June 28 and July 2. An analysis of the emails contained in the account showed a wide range of protected health information could potentially have been accessed by the attacker. Patients are now being notified of the breach by mail and have been advised to monitor their account...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 7, 2018The New Mexico Department of Health is currently investigating how the private medical records of some of its patients came to fall from a truck during transportation from the hospital to a secure storage facility. The records came from Turquoise Lodge Hospital, a rehabilitation center run by the New Mexico Department of Health that specializes in the treatment of parents and pregnant women who are recovering from substance abuse. The hospital had arranged for patients’ medical records to be collected and transported to a new location for storage. The paperwork was collected from the hospital on Thursday August 30; however, during transit some of those records fell out of the delivery truck onto a busy Albuquerque street. KRQE News 13 sent reporters to the scene who discovered medical records strewn along Avenida Cesar Chavez at I-25. Some of the paperwork had been collected by members of the public. The paperwork contained highly sensitive personally identifiable information (PII) and protected health information (PHI), including patients’ names, their medical histories, billing...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Sep 4, 2018The Arc of Erie County has been fined $200,000 by the New York Attorney General for violating HIPAA Rules by failing to secure the electronic protected health information (ePHI) of its clients. In February 2018, The Arc of Erie County, a nonprofit social services agency and chapter of the The Arc Of New York, was notified by a member of the public that some of its clients’ sensitive personal information was accessible through its website. The information could also be found through search engines. The investigation into the security breach revealed sensitive information had been accessible online for two and a half years, from July 2015 to February 2018 when the error was corrected. The forensic investigation into the security incident revealed multiple individuals from outside the United States had accessed the information on several occasions. The webpage should only have been accessible internally by staff authorized to view ePHI and should have required a username and password to be entered before access to the data could be gained. In total, 3,751 clients in New York had...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 30, 2018An error in a mailing to Missouri Care members reminding them to book well-child visits has resulted in the accidental disclosure of the personal information of almost 20,000 children to other Missouri Care members. The personal information detailed in the letters was limited to children’s names, ages, and the names of their provider’s. Health information and other sensitive data was not exposed, so the potential for the information to be misused is low. However, out of an abundance of caution, parents and legal guardians of affected children have been advised to monitor their credit card bills and account statements for any suspicious activity and told not to respond to any email requests asking for further personal information. Free credit monitoring services have been offered to all individuals affected by the breach. WellCare Health Plans Inc., discovered the error on July 25, 2018 and launched an investigation to determine how the error occurred and the individuals that were impacted. The mailing had been sent to 19,570 individuals, although it is unclear how many of those...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 29, 2018The West Los Angeles-based drug and alcohol treatment center, Authentic Recovery Center, is alerting 1,790 individuals that some of their personally identifiable information (PII) and protected health information (PHI) has potentially been obtained by an unauthorized individual as a result of a phishing attack. The phishing attack was discovered on June 21, 2018 prompting a full investigation. The investigation confirmed that the breach was limited to a single email account. All other email accounts and systems remained secure at all times. Access was first gained the email account on June 7, 2018 and continued until the breach was detected on June 21 and the account was secured. An email-by-email analysis of the compromised account revealed it contained the PII and PHI of clients and employees. Employee information accessible through the account was limited to name and driver’s license number, with the exception of two individuals who also had their address, contact telephone number, date of birth, and Social Security number exposed. Clients impacted by the incident had their name...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 24, 2018July 2018 was the worst month of 2018 for healthcare data breaches by a considerable distance. There were 33 breaches reported in July – the same number of breaches as in June – although 543.6% more records were exposed in July than the previous month. The breaches reported in July 2018 impacted 2,292,552 patients and health plan members, which is 202,859 more records than were exposed in April, May, and June combined. A Bad Year for Patient Privacy So far in 2018 there have been 221 data breaches of more than 500 records reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights. Those breaches have resulted in the protected health information of 6,112,867 individuals being exposed, stolen, or impermissibly disclosed. To put that figure into perspective, it is 974,688 more records than were exposed in healthcare data breaches in all of 2017 and there are still five months left of 2018. Largest Healthcare Data Breaches of 2018 (Jan-July) Entity Name Entity Type Records Exposed Breach Type UnityPoint Health Business Associate 1,421,107 Hacking/IT Incident CA...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 21, 2018Central Colorado Dermatology (CCD) has notified more than 4,000 patients that some of their protected health information (PHI) has potentially been accessed by hackers during a ransomware attack on its computer network. An unauthorized individual gained access to CCD’s computer network and deployed ransomware on a server. Medical records and patients’ medical charts were not accessed, although certain files and scanned fax communications were encrypted. Some of those files contained PHI. An investigation was launched to determine whether protected health information was accessed or stolen although it was not possible to determine with a high degree of certainty whether any PHI was viewed or copied. CCD did not uncover any evidence to suggest that PHI had been accessed or stolen, although some of the software that had been installed on its network could have allowed files to be downloaded. The files that could have been accessed including the following information: Names, addresses, contact telephone numbers, dates of birth, email addresses, Insurance information, Social Security...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 21, 2018Legacy Health has discovered an unauthorized individual has gained access to its email system and the protected health information (PHI) of approximately 38,000 patients. The Portland, OR-based health system operates two regional hospitals, four community hospitals, and 70 clinics in Oregon, Southwest Washington, and the and the Mid-Willamette Valley and is the second largest health system in the Portland Metro Area. The data breach was discovered on June 21, 2018, although the email accounts were first accessed by an unauthorized individual in May. Legacy Health determined that access was gained to the email accounts as a result of employees being duped by phishing emails. Email breaches can take a considerable amount of time to investigate. While tools are available to scan email accounts for protected health information, many of the emails in compromised accounts need to be individually checked, which can involve manual checks of hundreds of thousands of messages.  According to Legacy Health Spokesperson Kelly Love, “We’ve been moving at as fast a pace as we can to...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 20, 2018The Gordon Schanzlin New Vision Institute in La Jolla, CA, is alerting thousands of patients that their medical records may have been stolen after files containing protected health information were discovered in the possession of an individual unauthorized to hold the information. The data breach came to light following an investigation conducted by the U.S. Postal Inspection Service. A raid was conducted on a property in Southern California and a box of medical records was discovered in the property. The files contained information such as names, dates of service, addresses, health insurance information, Social Security numbers, and health and clinical information. Gordon Schanzlin was notified of the discovery on June 15, 2018, and an internal investigation was immediately launched to determine the nature and scope of the breach and how the medical records had been stolen. While it could not be confirmed with 100% certainty, Gordon Schanzlin believes the medical records were part of a batch of files that were stolen from a storage unit that was broken into in October 2017. The...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 20, 2018The $115 million settlement proposed by Anthem Inc., in 2017 to resolve the class action lawsuits filed by victims of its 78.8 million-record data breach in 2015 received final approval on Thursday, August 16. The Anthem cyberattack resulted in plan members’ names, dates of birth, health insurance information, Social Security numbers and other data elements stolen by cybercriminals. Several class-action lawsuits were filed in the wake of the breach, which were consolidated into a single lawsuit by the Judicial Panel for Multidistrict Litigation in June 2015. The case was assigned to the U.S District Court for the Northern District of California, where a large proportion of the class members reside. While 78.8 million individuals had protected health information (PHI) exposed when Anthem’s network was hacked, there are only 19.1 million members of the class action lawsuit, all of whom were able to demonstrate that their personal information was stored in the data center that was attacked by hackers. Following the data breach, Anthem offered breach victims 24 months of credit...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 17, 2018InterAct of Michigan, a provider of mental health and substance abuse treatments through clinics in Kalamazoo and Grand Rapids, has discovered an unauthorized individual has gained access to the email account of an employee and potentially viewed and copied the protected health information of 1,290 patients. The attack was discovered on June 8, 2018 prompting a thorough investigation to determine the nature and scope of the breach. Immediate action was taken to terminate access to the compromised account and an internal investigation was launched. A leading computer forensics company was retained to provide assistance with the investigation. On July 30, 2018, InterAct of Michigan determined that the protected health information of certain patients had potentially been accessed. The information was present in emails and email attachments in the compromised account. The exposed PHI included clients’ names and Social Security numbers. For some patients, date of birth, prescription details, and treatment history may also have been accessed. Due to the sensitive nature of the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 17, 2018More than 258,000 people have had their personal health information, personal identification information and/or tax information exposed as a result of a data security incident in Adams County, Wisconsin. A potential security breach was detected on March 28, 2018 after questionable activity was identified on the Adams County computer system and network. An investigation was launched to determine whether any sensitive data had been accessed and on June 29, a data breach was confirmed to have occurred. Some evidence has been found that suggests PHI and PII has been accessed and potentially obtained by an unauthorized individual. 258,102 individuals have potentially been affected. The exposed data was collected between January 1, 2013 and March 28, 2018 and were stored on the systems used by the departments of Health and Human Services, Child Support, Veteran Service Office, Extension Office, Adams County Employees, Solid Waste, and the Sheriff’s Office. A criminal investigation has been launched into the breach and the suspect(s) have been prevented from accessing the entire...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 17, 2018A serious data breach has been reported by Augusta University Health that has impacted an estimated 417,000 individuals including patients, faculty members and a limited number of students. Most of the patients affected by the breach had previously received medical services at Augusta University Medical Center or Children’s Hospital of Georgia, although patients from over 80 outpatient clinics in Georgia have also been affected and had their personally identifiable information (PII) and protected health information (PHI) exposed. A wide range of PII and PHI was exposed, including names, addresses, dates of birth, lab test results, diagnoses, medications, treatment information, dates of service, medical record numbers, surgical information, and health insurance details. Augusta University Health said only a small percentage of individuals had a driver’s license number or Social Security number exposed. The PII and PHI were saved in emails and email attachments. Augusta University Health said a data security incident was discovered on September 11, 2017 following a phishing attack on...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 13, 2018The Oklahoma Department of Veteran Affairs has been accused of violating Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Rules by three Democrat lawmakers, who have also called for two top Oklahoma VA officials to be fired over the incident. The alleged HIPAA violation occurred during a scheduled internet outage, during which VA medical aides were prevented from gaining access to veterans’ medical records. The outage had potential to cause major disruption and prevent “hundreds” of veterans from being issued with their medications. To avoid this, the Oklahoma Department of Veteran Affairs allowed medical aides to access electronic medical records using their personal smartphones. In a letter to Oklahoma Governor Mary Fallin, Reps. Brian Renegar, Chuck Hoskin, and David Perryman called for the VA Executive Director Doug Elliot and the clinical compliance director Tina Williams to be fired over the alleged HIPAA violation. They claimed Elliot and Williams “have little regard for, and knowledge of, health care,” and allowing medical aides to access electronic medical...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 10, 2018MedSpring Urgent Care, a network of urgent care clinics in Atlanta, Chicago, Austin, Dallas, Fort Worth, and Houston, has discovered an unauthorized individual has gained access to an email account as a result of an employee being duped by a phishing email. The email account was compromised on May 8, 2018 but the security breach was not detected until May 17. Upon discovery of the breach, the email account was secured to prevent further unauthorized access and a leading cybersecurity forensics firm was contracted to conduct an investigation into the breach and assist with the breach response. MedSpring discovered on May 22, 2018 that the attacker potentially gained access to the protected health information of patients through the emails and email attachments. The breach was limited to a single email account and no other systems were compromised. A full review of all messages in the account was conducted to determine which patients had been affected and the types of information that had been exposed. MedSpring says the breach was limited to patients who had previously visited its...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 9, 2018In total, there were 143 data breaches reported to the media or the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in Q2, 2018 and the healthcare records of at least 3,143,642 patients were exposed, impermissibly disclosed, or stolen. Almost three times as many healthcare records were exposed or stolen in Q2, 2018 as Q1, 2018. The figures come from the Q2 2018 Breach Barometer Report from Protenus. The data for the report came from OCR data breach reports, data collected and collated by Databreaches.net, and proprietary data collected through the Protenus compliance and analytics platform, which monitors the tens of trillions of EHR access attempts by its healthcare clients. Q2 2018 Healthcare Data Breaches Month Data Breaches Records Exposed April 45 919,395 May 50 1,870,699 June 47 353,548   Q2, 2018 saw five of the top six breaches of 2018 reported. The largest breach reported – and largest breach of 2018 to date – was the 582,174-record breach at the California Department of Developmental Services – a burglary. It is unclear if any healthcare...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 9, 2018The SamSam ransomware attack on the City of Atlanta was initially expected to cost around $6 million to resolve: Substantially more than the $51,000 ransom demand that was issued. However, city officials now believe the final cost could be around $11 million higher, according to a “confidential and privileged” document obtained by The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. The attack has prompted a complete overhaul of the city’s software and systems, including system upgrades, new software, and the purchasing of new security services, computers, tablets, laptops, and mobile phones. The Colorado Department of Transportation was also attacked with SamSam ransomware this year and was issued with a similar ransom demand. As with the City of Atlanta, the ransom was not paid. In its case, the cleanup is expected to cost around $2 million. When faced with extensive disruption and a massive clean up bill it is no surprise that many victims choose to pay the ransom. Now new figures have been released that confirm just how many victims have paid to recover their files and regain control of their...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 8, 2018SSM Health St. Mary’s Hospital in Jefferson City, Missouri is informing hundreds of thousands of patients that some of their protected health information has been left unprotected and could potentially have been viewed by unauthorized individuals. On November 16, 2014, St. Mary’s Hospital moved to new premises and all patients’ medical records were transferred to the new facility and were secured at all times. However, on June 1, 2018, the hospital discovered many documents containing protected health information had been left behind. The documents were mostly administrative and operational supporting documents and contained only a limited amount of protected health information. For the majority of patients, the only information that was exposed was their name and medical record number. Some patients also had some clinical data, demographic information, and financial information exposed. Due to the number of documents involved, the hospital has retained a document services firm to catalogue all the documents and determine which patients have had some of their PHI exposed. It has...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 7, 2018A hacktivist who conducted a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack on Boston’s Children’s Mercy Hospital in 2014 has been convicted on two counts – conspiracy to intentionally damage protected computers and damaging protected computers – by a jury in the U.S. District Court in Boston. Martin Gottesfeld, 32, of Somerville, MA, conducted the DDoS attacks in March and April of 2014. He first conducted a DDoS attack on Wayside Youth and Family Support Network in Framingham, MA. The attack crippled its systems and took them out of action for more than a week. The attack cost the healthcare facility $18,000 to resolve. Following that attack, Gottesfeld conducted a much larger attack on Boston Children’s Hospital using 40,000 malware-infected network routers that he controlled from his home computer. The attack was planned for a week and occurred on April 19, 2014. Such was the scale of the attack that the hospital and several others in the Longwood medical area were knocked off the internet. 65,000 IP addresses used by the hospital and other healthcare facilities in the area were...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 3, 2018A round up of data breaches recently disclosed to the media and the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights System Error Exposed Data at Pennsylvania Department of Human Services Pennsylvania Department of Human Services has discovered a system error in its Compass system allowed certain individuals to view the protected health information of others who, at some point, were part of the same benefit household but are now part of a different active case record. The types of information that could have been viewed included names, citizenship, date of birth, and all information reported about employment, although not Social Security numbers. No reports have been received to date to suggest any of the information was accessed and misused. The system glitch was detected on May 23, 2018 and has now been corrected. All 2,130 individuals potentially impacted have been notified of the breach by mail. Lost Laptop Exposes PHI of Ambercare Patients The Ambercare Corporation, a provider of hospice and home care services in New Mexico, has announced that an unencrypted...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 2, 2018There has been a steady rise in the number of reported email data breaches over the past year. According to the July edition of the Beazley Breach Insights Report, email compromises accounted for 23% of all breaches reported to Beazley Breach Response (BBR) Services in Q2, 2018. In Q2, 2018 there were 184 reported cases of email compromises, an increase from the 173 in Q1, 2018 and 120 in Q4, 2017. There were 45 such breaches in Q1, 2017, and each quarter has seen the number of email compromise breaches increase. In Q2, 2018, the email account compromises were broadly distributed across a range of industry sectors, although the healthcare industry experienced more than its fair share. Healthcare email accounts often contain a treasure trove of sensitive data that can be used for identity theft, medical identity theft, and other types of fraud. The accounts can contain the protected health information of thousands of patients. The recently discovered phishing attack on Boys Town National Research Hospital resulted in the attackers gaining access to the PHI of more than 105,000...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Aug 1, 2018An error made by a transcription service provider during a software upgrade on a server has resulted in the exposure of more than 19,000 patients’ protected health information (PHI). Patients affected by the breach had received medical services at Orlando Orthopaedic Center clinics in Orlando, Florida prior to January 2018. The software upgrade took place in December 2017 and throughout the month, PHI stored on the server became accessible over the Internet without any need for authentication. Orlando Orthopaedic Center only became aware of the exposure of patients’ PHI in February 2018. The discovery of the breach prompted a full investigation, which revealed names, dates of birth, insurance information, employer details, and treatment types were accessible. A limited number of patients also had their Social Security numbers exposed. It is unclear whether any PHI was accessed by unauthorized individuals during the time that the protections were removed. Orlando Orthopaedic Center said it has not received any reports from patients that indicate PHI has been misused and no evidence...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 31, 2018A massive UnityPoint Health phishing attack has been reported, one in which the protected health information of 1.4 million patients has potentially been obtained by hackers. This phishing incident is the largest healthcare data breach of 2018 by some distance, involving more than twice the number of healthcare records as the California Department of Developmental Services data breach reported in April and the LifeBridge Health breach reported in May. This is also the largest phishing incident to be reported by a healthcare provider since the HHS’ Office for Civil Rights (OCR) started publishing data breaches in 2009 and the largest healthcare breach since the 3,466,120-record breach reported by Newkirk Products, Inc., in August 2016. Email Impersonation Attack Fools Several Employees into Disclosing Login Credentials The UnityPoint Health phishing attack was detected on May 31, 2018. The forensic investigation revealed multiple email accounts had been compromised between March 14 and April 3, 2018 as a result of employees being fooled by email impersonation scams. Business email...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 30, 2018Confluence Health, a not-for-profit health system that operates Central Washington Hospital, Wenatchee Valley Hospital and a dozen satellite clinics in Central and North Central Washington, has experienced a data security incident involving an employee’s email account that may have resulted in unauthorized accessing of patients’ protected health information. The security breach was discovered on May 29, 2018. A digital forensics firm was called in to conduct an investigation, which revealed the email account had been accessed by an unauthorized individual on May 28 and May 30, 2018. The email account only contained a limited amount of protected health information and no highly sensitive data such as Social Security numbers or financial information was exposed. Patients impacted by the incident have had information such as their names and treatment information exposed. Confluence Health had multiple security solutions in place to prevent unauthorized account access and staff had received security awareness training, yet those measures were bypassed by the attacker. While PHI access...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 27, 2018The medical records of more than 17,000 patients have been exposed in two recent incidents in Oregon and Massachusetts. Lane County Health and Human Services Alerts Patients to Loss of PHI Lane County Health and Human Services in Oregon is notifying more than 700 patients that some of their protected health information has been lost and has potentially been destroyed. 49 boxes containing patient files were moved to a temporary storage facility while the Charnelton Clinic in Eugene was being renovated. During a routine search, the boxes of files were discovered to be missing from the storage facility on June 19. Multiple teams conducted further searches for the missing boxes but they could not be located. Lane County Health and Human Services suspects the boxes of files have been destroyed along with other paperwork as part of its normal document management practice for non-medical records. However, it has not been possible to confirm whether that was definitely the case. The files contained information such as patients’ full names, addresses, telephone numbers, medical histories...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 26, 2018A class action lawsuit filed in the wake of an employee-related data breach at Flowers Hospital in Dothan, Alabama in 2014 is heading towards being settled. The settlement has yet to receive final court approval, although approval seems likely and a resolution to this four-year legal battle is now in sight. In contrast to most class action lawsuits filed over the exposure/theft of PHI, this case involved the theft of data by an insider rather than a hacker. Further, the former employee used PHI for identity theft and fraud and was convicted of those crimes. The breach in question involved a former lab technician, Kamarian D. Millender, who was found in possession of paper records containing patients protected health information. Millender admitted to using the information for identity theft and for filing false tax returns in victims’ names. In December 2014, Millender was sentenced to serve two years in jail. In the class action lawsuit, filed the same year, it was claimed that between June 2013 and December 2014, paper records were left unprotected and unguarded at the hospital...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 25, 2018Blue Springs Family Care in Missouri has experienced a ransomware attack that has resulted in the encryption of sensitive data. The attack was detected by the healthcare provider’s computer vendor on May 12, 2018.  An investigation was launched the same day by the computer vendor with assistance provided by a contracted third-party computer forensics firm. In contrast to many ransomware attacks which involve a single ransomware variant being downloaded and blind file encryption, the attacker managed to gain access to Blue Springs Family Care systems and installed a variety of malicious software programs in addition to the ransomware. Those malware programs would have given the attacker full access to all Blue Springs Family Care computer systems, including access to all patients protected health information. At the time of issuing notifications to patients, Blue Springs Family Care had not received any reports to suggest that any PHI was stolen and misused by the attacker. However, data access and data theft could not be ruled out. The types of information potentially accessed...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 24, 2018The phishing attacks on healthcare organizations continue… The past few days have seen two further healthcare organizations announce that email accounts were breached when employees responded to phishing emails. Email Account Compromised at Boys Town National Research Hospital Boys Town National Research Hospital (Boys Town), an Omaha, NE hospital specializing in pediatric deafness, visual and communication disorders, has announced that a recent phishing campaign has resulted in the email account of an employee being accessed by an unauthorized individual. The email account contained the protected health information of 105,309 patients Boys Town first became aware of a security breach on May 23, 2018 when unusual email account activity was detected. Computer forensics experts were called in to investigate and a breach was confirmed to have occurred on May 23. Boys Town painstakingly examined the account email-by-email to determine which patients potentially had their PHI exposed and the amount of PHI that was potentially compromised. The breach was confirmed as being confined to a...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 20, 2018Golden Heart Administrative Professionals, a Fairbanks, AK-based billing company and business associate of several healthcare providers in Alaska, is notifying 44,600 individuals that some of their protected health information has potentially been accessed by unauthorized individuals as a result of a recent ransomware attack. The ransomware was downloaded to a server containing the PHI of patients. According to a press release issued by the company, “All client patient information must assume to be compromised.” Local and federal law enforcement agencies have been notified about the cyberattack and efforts are continuing to recover files. The Golden Heart Administrative Professionals ransomware attack is the largest data breach reported by a healthcare organization in July, and the second major data breach to be reported by an Alaska-based healthcare organization in July. In early July, the Alaska Department of Health and Social Services announced that it had suffered a data breach as a result of a malware infection. The Zeus/Zbot Trojan – an information stealer – had...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 19, 2018A New York physician has started notifying patients that their protected health information has been exposed and has been potentially accessed unauthorized individuals. Ruben U. Carvajal, MD was alerted to a possible privacy breach on January 3, 2018 and was informed that some of his patients’ health information was accessible over the Internet. An investigation into the possible privacy breach was launched and the matter was reported to the New York Police Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). FBI investigators visited his office and examined his computer. On February 18, 2018, the FBI confirmed that the EMR program on his computer had been accessed by an unauthorized individual. A forensic investigator was called in to conduct a thorough investigation to determine the nature and scope of the breach. On May 22, 2018 the forensic investigator determined that the physician’s computer had been accessed by an unauthorized individual between December 16, 2017 and January 3, 2018. Any individual that gained access to the physicians’ computer could have gained access...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 19, 2018Certain employees of a Canandaigua, NY nursing home have been using their smartphones to take photographs and videos of at least one resident and have shared those images and videos with others on Snapchat – a violation of HIPAA and serious violation of patient privacy. The privacy breaches occurred at Thompson Health’s M.M. Ewing Continuing Care Center and involved multiple employees. Thompson Health has already taken action and has fired several workers over the violations. Now the New York Department of Health and the state attorney general’s office have got involved and are conducting investigations. The state attorney general’s Deputy Press Secretary, Rachel Shippee confirmed to the Daily Messenger that an investigation has been launched, confirming “The Medicaid Fraud Control Unit’s mission includes the protection of nursing home residents from abuse, neglect and mistreatment, including acts that violate a resident’s rights to dignity and privacy.” Thompson Health does not believe the images/videos were shared publicly and sharing was restricted to a group of employees at the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 18, 2018There was a 13.8% month-over-month increase in healthcare data breaches in June 2018. Data breaches were up, but the breaches were far less severe in June, with 42.48% fewer healthcare records exposed or stolen than in May. In June there were 33 healthcare data breaches reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights and those breaches saw 356,232 healthcare records exposed or stolen – the lowest number of records exposed in healthcare data breaches since March 2018. Healthcare Data Breaches (January-June 2018) Healthcare Records Exposed (January-June 2018) Causes of Healthcare Data Breaches (June 2018) Unauthorized access/disclosure incidents were the biggest problem area in June, followed by hacking IT incidents. As was the case in May, there were 15 unauthorized access/disclosure breaches and 12 hacking/IT incidents. The remaining six breaches involved the theft of electronic devices (4 incidents) and paper records (2 incidents). There were no reported losses of devices or paperwork and no improper disposal incidents. Healthcare Records Exposed...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 18, 2018Two more healthcare organizations have reported phishing attacks that have resulted in cybercriminals gaining access to the protected health information of patients, both of which saw the attackers gain access to multiple email accounts. Sunspire Health, which runs a national network of addition treatment facilities, saw several email accounts compromised as a result of a phishing campaign targeting its employees. The attacks were discovered between April 10, 2018 and May 17, 2018. Forensic investigators were called in to determine the nature and scope of the incidents. The investigation revealed the first email account was compromised on March 1, 2018, with further accounts compromised and accessed by unauthorized individuals up until May 4. No patients have reported misuse of protected health information to Sunspire Health to date, and no evidence was found to suggest the email accounts had been misused, although it is possible that protected health information in the compromised email accounts was accessed and may have been downloaded by the attacker(s). The types of information...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 17, 2018LabCorp, one of the largest clinical laboratories in the United States, has experienced a cyberattack that has potentially resulted in hackers gaining access to patients’ sensitive information; however, data theft appears unlikely as the cyberattack has now been confirmed as being a ransomware attack. It has been suggested that variant of SamSam ransomware was used in the brute force RDP attack, although this has not been confirmed by LabCorp. The Burlington, NC-based company runs 36 primary testing laboratories throughout the United States and the Los Angeles National Genetics Institute. The company performs standard blood and urine tests, HIV tests and specialty diagnostic testing services and holds vast quantities of highly sensitive data. The cyberattack occurred over the weekend of July 14, 2018 when suspicious system activity was identified by LabCorp’s intrusion detection system within 50 minutes of the attack commencing. Prompt action was taken to terminate access to its servers and systems were taken offline to contain the attack. With its systems offline, this naturally...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 16, 2018The email accounts of two employees of the Alive Hospice in Tennessee have been compromised as a result of the employees falling for phishing scams. The email account breaches were identified during a review of the email system on May 15, 2018. During the review, ongoing unauthorized access to the email accounts was detected. Alive Hospice immediately took steps to block third-party access by performing a password reset, and third-party forensics investigators were called in to determine the nature and scope of the breach. The investigation revealed the first email account was compromised on or around December 20, 2017, with the second account compromised on or around April 5, 2018. An analysis of both email accounts revealed they contained the protected health information of patients, which may have been accessed by the person(s) responsible for the attacks. The types of information that may have been accessed varied for each patient and included names, dates of birth, Social Security numbers, driver’s license numbers, passport numbers, financial account numbers, copies of...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 16, 2018The email account of an employee of Billings Clinic in Billings, MT, that contained the protected health information of 8,435 patients, has been compromised. The breach was detected by the clinic’s cybersecurity systems on May 14, 2018, with unusual activity triggering an alert. Rapid action was taken to secure the account, although it is possible that the PHI of patients could have been viewed or copied. The information in the account was limited. No financial information was exposed, access to medical records was not gained, and no Social Security numbers were stored in the account. Data in the account had been used for scheduling purposes and related to patients who received medical services between 2008 and 2011. The breach was limited to names, dates of birth, contact information, diagnoses, descriptions of medical services provided, medical record numbers, and internal financial control numbers. The investigation confirmed that the breach was limited to a single email account. While data breaches such as this can easily be caused as a result of employees responding to...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 13, 2018Legal action has been taken over a phishing attack on Children’s Mercy that resulted in the theft of 63,049 patients’ protected health information. In total, five email accounts were compromised between December 2017 and January 2018. On December, 2, 2017  two email accounts were discovered to have been accessed by an unauthorized individual as a result of employees responding to phishing emails. Links in the emails directed the employees to a website where they were fooled into disclosing their email account credentials. Two weeks later, two more email accounts were compromised in a similar attack, with a fifth and final account compromised in early January. The mailbox accounts of four of those compromised email accounts were downloaded by the attacker, resulting in the unauthorized disclosure of patients’ protected health information. Patients were notified of the breach via a substitute breach notice on the Children’s Mercy website and notification letters were sent by mail. Due to the number of people impacted, the letters were sent out in batches. According to a recent...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 13, 2018A summary of hacking incidents and employee data breaches recently discovered by healthcare organizations. Hacked Email Account Contained PHI of 18,000 UMC Physicians’ Patients UMC Physicians in Texas is notifying approximately 18,000 patients that some of their protected health information has been exposed as a result of the hacking of a physicians’ email account. The breach occurred on March 15, 2018, although it was not discovered by the UMC Physicians’ IT team until May 18, giving the hacker two months to access the data stored in the account. While the investigation did not uncover any evidence of actual or attempted misuse of PHI, it was not possible to determine with a high degree of certainty that PHI had not been compromised. Consequently, all patients whose PHI was potentially accessed have been offered complimentary credit monitoring and identity theft protection services for 12 months. An analysis of the email account revealed the following information was potentially viewed/obtained by the hacker: Patients’ full names, addresses, phone numbers, medical record numbers,...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 12, 2018An error by an employee of Metro Health has resulted in the exposure of highly sensitive information of patients diagnosed with HIV or AIDS, according to a recent report in the Tennessean. The information was stored in a database which had been copied by the employee onto a server that was accessible by all employees in the Nashville Metro Public Health Department, even though the vast majority of those individuals were not authorized to access the information. The database was only supposed to be accessed by three government scientists. The database was present on the server for nine months before the file was found by an employee and Metro Health officials were notified. During the time that the file was on the server, more than 500 employees could potentially have accessed the database. The database contained information such as names, addresses, lab test results, HIV diagnoses, drug usage, sexual orientation, birth dates, and Social Security numbers. The data came from the Enhanced HIV/AIDS Reporting System – a national database that includes details of patients with HIV and...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 12, 2018A recent study conducted by the Ponemon Institute on behalf of IBM Security has revealed the hidden cost of data breaches, and for the first time, the cost of mitigating 1 million-record+ data breaches. The study provides insights into the costs of resolving data breaches and the full financial impact on organizations’ bottom lines. For the global study, 477 organizations were recruited and more than 2,200 individuals were interviewed and asked about the data breaches experienced at their organizations and the associated costs. The breach costs were calculated using the activity-based costing (ABC) methodology. The average number of records exposed or stolen in the breaches assessed in the study was 24,615 and 31,465 in the United States. Last year, the Annual Cost of a Data Breach Study by the Ponemon Institute/IBM Security revealed the cost of breaches had fallen year over year to $3.62 million. The 2018 study, conducted between February 2017 and April 2018, showed data breach costs have risen once again. The average cost of a data breach is now $3.86 million – An annual increase...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 11, 2018MedEvolve, a provider of electronic billing and record services to healthcare providers, has announced that an FTP server used by the firm had been left unsecured between March 29, 2018 and May 4, 2018. The FTP server contained a file that included the protected health information of patients. On March 29, the day that the protection was removed, the file was accessed by an unauthorized individual. MedEvolve discovered the breach on May 11, 2018. According to the breach notice submitted to the California Attorney General, the file contained the data of patients of Premier Immediate Medical Care. MedEvolve did not mention in the breach notice how many patients had been affected and the incident has yet to appear of the Department of Health and Human Services’ Breach Portal. However, in May, databreaches.net was alerted to the exposure of data by a security researcher who discovered the unprotected FTP server. According to the report, the file contained approximately 205,000 lines of patient data, each corresponding to a different patient. More than 11,000 Social Security number were...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 11, 2018Around 11am on Monday July 9, Cass Regional Medical Center in Harrisonville, MO, experienced a ransomware attack that affected its communication system and prevented staff from accessing its electronic medical record (EHR) system. The medical center had policies in place for such an emergency situation. Its incident response protocol was initiated within 30 minutes of the discovery of the attack and staff met to develop detailed plans to minimize the impact to patients. Ransomware attacks typically do not involve the attackers gaining access to data, although as a precaution, it’s EHR vendor – Meditech – shut down the EHR system while the attack was investigated and remediated. At this stage, no evidence has been uncovered to suggest patient data have been accessed. As an additional precautionary measure, ambulances for trauma and stroke have been redirected to other medical facilities. Without access to the EHR system, staff resorted to pen and paper while its IT staff worked to decrypt data and bring its systems back online. A leading international forensics firm was called in to...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 11, 2018A former employee of Arkansas Children’s Hospital is being investigated by law enforcement over the theft and misuse of patients’ protected health information. According to the breach notice submitted to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights, the former employee potentially viewed and copied the PHI of up to 4,521 patients. That individual was employed at Arkansas Children’s Hospital for 15 months between November 7, 2016 and February 6, 2018. During that time the employee was provided with access to patient health information to perform essential functions of the job. On May 9, 2018, law enforcement notified Arkansas Children’s Hospital that an investigation had been launched over the possible theft of patients’ Social Security numbers and personal information and the misuse of that information for personal gain. Arkansas Children’s Hospital immediately launched an investigation to determine the types of information that were potentially accessed and whether patients’ PHI had been accessed without authorization. While that internal investigation...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 6, 2018Manitowoc County in Wisconsin has announced protected health information has been stolen as a result of a successful phishing attack. The incident occurred on or around January 14, 2018, although the attack and data breach was not discovered until April 24. While the account was immediately secured to prevent any further access, the attacker had well over two months to view and obtain sensitive data stored in the email account. During the time that the attacker had email account access, emails sent to that account were diverted to a different email account to which Manitowoc County staff had no access. While County officials have not uncovered any evidence to suggest any of the information in the emails has been misused, they have similarly not been able to establish that sensitive data have not been misused or sold on. The types of information that were stolen include names, telephone numbers, email addresses, addresses, and dates of birth. Individuals who received services through the County have also had their health information, insurance information, details of prescriptions,...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 3, 2018Humana is notifying members in several states that their PHI has potentially been accessed during a ‘sophisticated’ spoofing attack. A spoofing attack is an attempt by a threat actor or bot to gain access to a system or data using stolen or spoofed login credentials. Humana became aware of the attack on June 3, when large numbers of failed login attempts were detected from foreign IP addresses. Prompt action was taken to block the attack, with the foreign IP addresses blocked from accessing its Humana.com and Go365.com websites on June 4. Humana suggests “the nature of the attack and observed behaviors indicated the attacker had a large database of user identifiers (IDs).” It is possible the login credentials are old and that they were obtained in a separate third-party breach, although Humana notes that “the excessive number of log in failures strongly suggests the ID and password combinations did not originate from Humana.” The website accounts did not contain Social Security numbers or financial information; however, the following types of information could potentially have been...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 3, 2018The Alaska Department of Health and Social Services (ADHSS) is notifying ‘more than 500’ individuals that some of their protected health information (PHI) has potentially been accessed and stolen by hackers. On April 26, the ADHSS discovered malware had been installed on an employee’s computer after suspicious behavior was detected. The investigation revealed malware had been installed – a variant of the Zeus/Zbot Trojan – which is known to be used to steal sensitive information. The malware was discovered to have communicated with IP addresses in Russia, although it is not known whether the attackers are based in Russia or just using Russian IP addresses. ADHSS has not confirmed whether protected health information was exfiltrated to those IP addresses, although data access and theft of PHI is a possibility. Under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, HIPAA-covered entities must report data breaches as soon as possible, but no later than 60 days following the discovery of a breach. AHDSS chose to delay the issuing of notifications until just before...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 3, 2018A former University of Pittsburgh Medical Center patient information coordinator has been indicted by a federal grand jury over criminal violations of HIPAA Rules, according to an announcement by the Department of Justice on June 29, 2018. Linda Sue Kalina, 61, of Butler, Pennsylvania, has been charged in a six-count indictment that includes wrongfully obtaining and disclosing the protected health information of 111 patients. Kalina worked at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center and the Allegheny Health Network between March 30, 2016 and August 14, 2017. While employed at the healthcare organizations, Kalina is alleged to have accessed the protected health information (PHI) of those patients without authorization or any legitimate work reason for doing so. Additionally, Kalina is alleged to have stolen PHI and, on four separate occasions between December 30, 2016, and August 11, 2017, disclosed that information to three individuals with intent to cause malicious harm. Kalina was arrested following an investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The case was taken up...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jul 2, 2018This week, Associated Dermatology & Skin Cancer Clinic of Helena, MT, has disclosed a breach of physical protected health information (PHI) affecting 1,254 patients. A journal maintained by an employee of Associate Dermatology was stolen from her vehicle on May 26, 2018. A thief forcibly gained access to the vehicle and stole the personal journal, which contained information to help the employee with the provision of care to patients. The types of information recorded in the journal included names and ages of patients, their referring physicians, brief notes on patients’ medical histories, reasons for visits, and visit notes. Patients whose PHI has been obtained by the thief had received medical services through Associated Dermatology between September 1, 2017 and May 24, 2018. While highly sensitive information – the types that can be used to steal identities – were not stored in the journal, there is potential the information could be misused, although no reports have been received to date to suggest that is the case. The biggest risk is the use of the information in social...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 29, 2018The FBI has released its 2017 Internet Crime Report. Data for the report came from complaints made through its Internet Crime Complaints Center (IC3). The report highlights the most common online scams, the scale of Internet crime, and the substantial losses suffered as a result of Internet-related crimes. In 2017, there were 301,580 complaints made to IC3 about Internet crime, with total losses for the year exceeding $1.4 billion. Since 2013, when the first Internet Crime Report was first published, more than $5.52 billion has been lost in online scams and more than 1.4 million complaints have been received. The leading types of online crime in 2017 were non-payment/non-delivery, personal data breaches, and phishing; however, the biggest losses came from business email compromise (BEC) attacks, confidence scams/romance fraud, and non-payment/non-delivery. The losses from business email compromise scams (and email account compromise scams on consumers) exceeded $675 million. BEC/EAC scams resulted in more than three times the losses as confidence fraud/romance scams – the second...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 28, 2018An unencrypted laptop computer containing the protected health information (PHI) of 870 patients of Michigan Medicine has been stolen. The PHI was saved on a personal laptop computer which had been left unattended in an employee’s vehicle. A thief broke into the car and stole the employee’s bag, which contacted the device. The theft occurred on June 3, 2018 and it was immediately reported to law enforcement. Michigan Medicine was informed of the theft the following day on June 4. The laptop contained a range of protected health information of patients who had participated in research studies. The types of information exposed varied depending on the type of research the patients had participated in. Highly sensitive information such as Social Security numbers, health plan ID numbers, and financial information were not stored on the device and addresses and contact telephone numbers were not exposed. The information exposed was limited to names, medical record numbers, gender, race, diagnoses, and treatment information. All of the research studies had been approved by the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 27, 2018Faxes containing the protected health information (PHI) of a patient have been sent to an incorrect recipient by OhioHealth’s Grant Medical Center over a period of several months – A violation of patient privacy and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). The recipient of the faxes, Elizabeth Spilker, tried on numerous occasions to notify Grant Medical Center about the problem and stop the faxes being sent, but her efforts were unsuccessful. She tried faxing back a message on the same number requesting a change to the programmed fax number and tried contacting the medical center by telephone. Spilker later notified ABC6 about the issue and the story was covered in a June 18 report. In the report, Spilker explained that faxes had been received from Grant Medical Center for more than a year. The messages contained a range of protected health information including name, age, weight, medical history, medications prescribed, and other sensitive health information. Typically, the faxes were received at the end of the day. Repeated attempts were made to send the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 26, 2018Many healthcare organizations have now transitioned to secure messaging systems and have retired their outdated pager systems. Healthcare organizations that have not yet made the switch to secure text messaging platforms should take note of a recent security breach that saw pages from multiple hospitals intercepted by a ‘radio hobbyist’ in Missouri. Intercepting pages using software defined radio (SDR) is nothing new. There are various websites that explain how the SDR can be used and its capabilities, including the interception of private communications. The risk of PHI being obtained by hackers using this tactic has been well documented.  All that is required is some easily obtained hardware that can be bought for around $30, a computer, and some free software. In this case, an IT worker from Johnson County, MO purchased an antenna and connected it to his laptop in order to pick up TV channels. However, he discovered he could pick up much more. By accident, he intercepted pages sent by physicians at several hospitals. The man told the Kansas City Star he intercepted pages...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 21, 2018Following the alleged inappropriate accessing of patient health records by employees, Washington Health System has taken the decision to suspend several employees while the privacy breach is investigated. While it has not been confirmed how many employees have been suspended, Washington Health System VP of strategy and clinical services, Larry Pantuso, issued a statement to the Observer Reporter indicating around a dozen employees have been suspended, although at this stage, no employees have been fired for inappropriate medical record access. The privacy breaches are believed to relate to the death of an employee of the WHS Neighbor Health Center. Kimberly Dollard, 57, was killed when an out of control car driven by Chad Spence, 43, rammed into the building where she worked. Spence and one other individual were admitted to the hospital after sustaining injuries in the accident. Pantuso did not confirm that this was the incident that prompted the employees to access patients’ medical records, although he did confirm that the alleged inappropriate access related to a “high profile...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 20, 2018Two HIPAA-covered entities have recently disclosed they have been victims of phishing attacks that have potentially resulted in the exposure of patients’ protected health information (PHI).   Further Phishing Attack Reported by Florida Agency for Persons with Disabilities The Florida Agency for Persons with Disabilities (FAPD), which provides support services for people with disabilities such as autism, cerebral palsy, spina bifida, and Downs syndrome, has experienced another phishing attack The phishing attack occurred on April 10, 2018 and was limited to a single email account; however, that account contained the PHI of 1,951 customers or guardians. While no evidence was uncovered to suggest any PHI was viewed or copied by the attacker, PHI access could not be ruled out with 100% certainty. The compromised email account contained information such as names, birth dates, addresses, telephone numbers, health information, and Social Security numbers. All patients have now been notified of the breach and have been offered credit monitoring services for a year without charge. Three...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 19, 2018April was a particularly bad month for healthcare data breaches with 41 reported incidents. While it is certainly good news that there has been a month-over-month reduction in healthcare data breaches, the severity of some of the breaches reported last month puts May on a par with April. There were 29 healthcare data breaches reported by healthcare providers, health plans, and business associates of covered entities in May – a 29.27% month-over month reduction in reported breaches. However, 838,587 healthcare records were exposed or stolen in those incidents – only 56,287 records fewer than the 41 incidents in April. In May, the mean breach size was 28,917 records and the median was 2,793 records. In April the mean breach size was 21,826 records and the median was 2,553 records. Causes of May 2018 Healthcare Data Breaches Unauthorized access/disclosure incidents were the most numerous type of breach in May 2018 with 15 reported incidents (51.72%). There were 12 hacking/IT incidents reported (41.38%) and two theft incidents (6.9%). There were no lost unencrypted electronic devices...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 18, 2018A former employee of the Veteran Affairs Medical Center in Long Beach, CA who stole the protected health information (PHI) of more than 1,000 patients has been sentenced to three years in jail. Albert Torres, 51, was employed as a clerk in the Long Beach Health System-run medical center – a position he held for less than a year. Torres was pulled over by police officers on April 12 after a check of his license plates revealed an anomaly – plates had been used on a private vehicle, which were typically reserved for commercial vehicles. The police officers found prescription medications which Torres’ did not have a prescription for and the Social Security numbers and other PHI of 14 patients in his vehicle. A subsequent search of Torres’ apartment revealed he had hard drives and zip drives containing the PHI of 1,030 patients and more than $1,000 in cleaning supplies that had been stolen from the hospital. After pleading guilty to several crimes, including identity theft and grand theft, Torres was sentenced to three years in state penitentiary on June 4. Sutter Health Fires...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 15, 2018Two HIPAA-covered entities are alerting patients that some of their protected health information (PHI) has been obtained by thieves in recent burglaries. PHI Taken from Employee of Christus Spohn Hospitals The protected health information of patients of two Christus Spohn Hospitals in Corpus Christi has been stolen in a burglary. A Christus Spohn employee was burgled on April 16, 2018 and PHI was taken including information such as names, birth dates, dates of service, medical record numbers, account numbers, ages, and other medical data. No financial information, driver’s license numbers, or Social Security numbers were compromised. Patients affected by the breach had previously received treatment at Christus Spohn Health System’s Memorial or Shoreline hospitals. While PHI was obtained, the information does not appear to have been misused. Christus Spohn has confirmed that approximately 1,800 patients have been affected by the incident. Steps have already been taken to prevent further incidents of this nature from occurring, and the employee in question has received further...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 13, 2018A phishing attack on Draper, UT-based HealthEquity Inc., has resulted in the exposure of members’ protected health information. The data breach was limited to one email account, although an analysis of the messages in the account revealed a range of PHI was potentially obtained by the attacker. Information possibly compromised in the attack was limited to names, email addresses, HealthEquity member ID numbers, employer ID numbers, employer names, health account type, deduction amounts, and for some Michigan-based employees, Social Security numbers. The breach was identified on April 13, 2018 and was discovered to have occurred two days previously, giving the attacker 48 hours to access messages in the account. Access to the compromised account was immediately terminated to prevent any further unauthorized access. A third-party computer forensics firm was engaged to conduct a full investigation into the attack. The investigation confirmed that the breach was limited to a single email account and access was gained due to human error – the employee responding to a phishing message. No...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 12, 2018An employee of Phoenix-based Terros Health was fooled by a phishing scam and inadvertently handed over login credentials to the attacker. That individual accessed the employee’s email account and potentially viewed or obtained a range of protected health information detailed in individual emails in the account. The breach was limited to one email account and access to other systems was not gained. Terros Health learned of the phishing attack on April 12, 2018 and notified the media on June 8. All patients impacted by the breach have now been notified by mail. An investigation into the attack revealed the employee responded to the phishing email on or around November 16, 2017, which was when the email account was first accessed by the attacker. While almost 1,600 patients potentially had some of their PHI compromised as a result of the attack, for the majority of patients (1,241) the exposed information was limited to names and dates of birth. The remaining patients also had their addresses, email addresses, diagnoses, medical record numbers, and other protected health information...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 11, 2018Rise Wisconsin is alerting more than 3,700 plan members that some of their protected health information was potentially accessed by unauthorized individuals during a recent ransomware attack. The ransomware was installed on its network on or around April 8, 2018. The ransomware attack was detected rapidly, although not in time to prevent the encryption of data. Rise Wisconsin (formerly Community Partnerships Inc., and Center for Families) called in third party computer forensics experts to assist with the breach investigation and recovery process. While the investigation did not uncover any evidence to suggest protected health information was accessed or stolen in the attack, it was not possible to rule out data access and data theft with a high degree of certainty. Potentially, the types of data that could have been accessed by the attackers includes names, addresses, dates of birth, Social Security numbers and, for certain patients, a limited amount of health information.  No financial information was compromised. Rise Wisconsin has not disclosed how much the attackers demanded...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 8, 2018A round up of healthcare data security incidents reported in the past few days that have resulted in the protected health information of patients being obtained by unauthorized individuals. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois Discovers PHI was Provided to an Imposter Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois has discovered the protected health information of some plan members has been disclosed to a doctor who was impersonating another physician. The doctor was employed by its business associate Dane Street and conducted peer to peer reviews for the firm – Further reviews when requests for services have been denied by an insurance company. Dane Street was notified by law enforcement on April 9, 2018 that the doctor had been fraudulently impersonating another physician in order to perform peer to peer reviews. Those reviews required the doctor to view information such as names, addresses, dates of birth, phone numbers, medical service information, and Social Security numbers. Since Social Security numbers were disclosed, affected patients have been offered complimentary credit...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 7, 2018Two HIPAA-covered entities are notifying patients that former employees have accessed databases and stolen protected health information to take to new employers. Former Hair Free Forever Employee Contacts Patients to Solicit Customers Hair Free Forever, a Ventura, CA-based provider of permanent hair removal treatments, has announced that a former employee has stolen patient information and has been contacting its patients in an attempt to solicit customers. The company uses Thermolysis to permanently remove hair. Since the technique is classed as a medical procedure, Hair Free Forever and its employees are required to comply with HIPAA Rules. In a data breach notice provided to the California attorney general, Hair Free Forever’s Cheryl Conway informs patients that the former employee accessed patient files and the company’s database and stole patients’ protected health information, in clear violation of HIPAA Rules. The data theft came to light when complaints were received from customers who had been contacted and told about the former employee’s new practice. An investigation...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Jun 4, 2018Dignity Health has discovered multiple data breaches and violations of HIPAA Rules in the past few weeks. One incident involved an employee accessing the PHI of patients without authorization, an error occurred that allowed a business associate to receive PHI without a valid BAA being in place, and most recently, a 55,947-record unauthorized access/disclosure incident has been reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights (OCR). Business Associate Agreement Error Discovered On May 10, 2018, Dignity Health notified OCR of a data breach affecting patients of its St. Rose Dominican Hospitals at the San Martin, Siena, and Rose de Lima campuses in Nevada. Dignity Health reports that on April 6, 2018, St Rose Dominican Hospitals shared the protected health information of 6,036 patients with a third-party contractor to process health-related court documents for hearings. The contractor had been used for ten years and a valid business associate agreement was previously in place; however, that document had expired and data continued to be shared with the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 31, 2018Two security breaches have been discovered by Purdue University’s security team that have potentially resulted in unauthorized individuals gaining access to the protected health information of patients. In April, Purdue University’s security team discovered a file on computers used by Purdue University Pharmacy indicating the devices had been remotely accessed by an unauthorized individual. The file was placed on the devices around September 1, 2017. The computers contained a limited amount of protected health information including patients’ names, dates of birth, dates of service, identification numbers, internal identification numbers, diagnoses, treatment information, and amounts billed. No personal financial information or Social Security numbers were stored on the computer. An investigation into the breach did not uncover any evidence to suggest any patient information was stolen and no reports have been received to suggest any patient data have been misused. However, since it was not possible to rule out unauthorized PHI access with a high degree of certainty, patients have...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 28, 2018Aultman Health Foundation, which runs Aultman Hospital in Canton, OH, is notifying approximately 42,600 patients that some of their protected health information may have been compromised as a result of a phishing attack. Unauthorized and unknown individuals succeeded in gaining access to several email accounts used by employees of Aultman Hospital, its AultWorks Occupational Medicine division, and certain Aultman physician offices. The unauthorized access was first detected on March 28, 2018 prompting a full investigation to determine the scope of the breach and whether any sensitive information was potentially accessed. Third-party information security experts were engaged to assist with the investigation and determined access to the email accounts occurred on several occasions starting in mid-February and continued until the breach was detected and remediated in late March. The breach was limited to email accounts. The system that stores electronic medical records was not compromised. Email accounts used by Aultman hospital and certain physician practices contained names,...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 25, 2018Rochester, MN-based Associates in Psychiatry and Psychology (APP) has experienced a ransomware attack that affected several computers containing patients’ protected health information. The ransomware attack was discovered on March 31, 2018. Patient information stored on the affected computers was not in a “human-readable” format, and no evidence was uncovered to suggest any protected health information was accessed or copied by the attackers. Since it was not possible to rule out data access with 100% certainty, all patients whose data were stored on the affected devices have been notified of the security breach. The types of information potentially accessed includes names, birth dates, addresses, Social Security numbers, insurance information, and treatment records. APP acted promptly when the attack was discovered and took its systems offline to prevent the spread of the ransomware and limit the potential for further encryption of data and data theft. APP’s systems remained offline for four days while the attack was assessed. APP notes in its Q&A about the incident that the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 23, 2018The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act was enacted in 2009 and includes a provision that calls for the Department of Health and Human Services to share a percentage of HIPAA settlements with victims of HIPAA violations and data breaches. This month has seen some progress in that area. The Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights has announced it is planning on issuing an advance notice of proposed rulemaking in November about sharing a percentage of the fines it collects through its HIPAA enforcement activities with the victims of data breaches. OCR officials have previously made it clear that steps will be taken to meet the requirements of this HITECH provision, but little progress has been made. This is not the first time that OCR has announced it plans to issue an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on the matter only for the advance notice of proposed rulemaking to be delayed. If OCR follows through on its plans this fall, feedback will be sought from the public and industry stakeholders on how it can achieve...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 23, 2018Earlier this month, the Baltimore-based healthcare provider LifeBridge Health announced it had experienced a data breach. A press release about the breach was issued on May 16, although there was no mention of the number of patients impacted. Further information has now been released on the extent of the breach. On March 18, 2018, LifeBridge Health discovered malware had been installed on a server that hosted the electronic medical record system used by LifeBridge Potomac Professionals and LifeBridge Health’s patient registration and billing systems. The discovery of malware prompted a through investigation to determine when access to the server was first gained. LifeBridge Health contracted a national computer forensics firm to assist with the investigation with the firm establishing that access to the server was first gained 18 months previously on September 27, 2016. The types of information stored on the server included patients’ names, dates of birth, addresses, diagnoses, medications prescribed, clinical and treatment information, insurance details, and a limited number of...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 22, 2018Allied Physicians Group of Michiana has experienced a ransomware attack that took part of its network out of action. The attack occurred on Thursday May 17, 2018 and resulted in the encryption of several files on its network. It is currently unclear whether any protected health information encrypted. An investigation into the security incident is continuing to determine whether any protected health information was compromised in the attack. The attack was detected promptly and action was immediately taken to shut down its network to protect the PHI of patients. Allied Physicians Group of Michiana has been working with its incident responder, outside counsel, and other professionals to determine the scope of the breach and recover encrypted data. The Indiana Physicians Group reports that all data have now been recovered in a secure format and the attack did not cause significant disruption to patients. Steps have already been taken to improve security and prevent future attacks of this nature from occurring. CEO Shery Roussarie explained in a May 21 press release that the attack...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 18, 2018April was a particularly bad month for healthcare data breaches with both the number of breaches and the number of individuals impacted by breaches both substantially higher than in March. There were 41 healthcare data breaches reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights in April. Those breaches resulted in the theft/exposure of 894,874 healthcare records. Healthcare Data Breach Trends For the past four months, the number of healthcare data breaches reported to OCR has increased month over month. For the third consecutive month, the number of records exposed in healthcare data breaches has increased. Causes of Healthcare Data Breaches in April 2018 The healthcare industry may be a big target for hackers, but the biggest cause of healthcare data breaches in April was unauthorized access/disclosure incidents. While cybersecurity defences have been improved to make it harder for hackers to gain access to healthcare data, there is still a major problem preventing accidental data breaches by insiders and malicious acts by healthcare employees....Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 16, 2018In a recent filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Burlington, MA-based Nuance Communications disclosed it experienced a data breach involving the protected health information of 45,000 individuals in December 2017. Nuance Communications stated in its May 10, 2018 SEC filing that a third party accessed certain reports hosted on a single Nuance transcription platform, which was promptly shut down when unauthorized access was discovered. The filing states law enforcement was notified about the breach and assisted with the investigation and apprehended the individual responsible. There is no mention of when the breach was discovered, although the company has notified all customers who used the platform to allow them to issue notifications to affected individuals. One of those customers, The San Francisco Health Network, published a substitute breach notice on its website on May 11 providing further information on the breach. The breach notice explains that the protected health information of 895 patients who received medical services at Zuckerberg San Francisco...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 15, 2018A laptop computer containing the protected health information of 2,553 patients of Eye Care Surgery Center, Inc., of Baton Rouge, LA has been stolen. The theft was discovered by Eye Care Surgery Center on February 26, 2018 although it is unclear where the device was stolen from. The theft prompted Eye Care Surgery Center to install a new multi-camera system at its facilities, both inside and outside buildings. The decision has also been taken to use encryption on most of the portable electronic devices used by Eye Care Surgery Center to prevent protected health information from being exposed in the event that any further portable electronic devices are stolen. An investigation was conducted to determine the types of information stored on the stolen device and the patients affected by the incident. Highly sensitive information such as health insurance information, Social Security numbers, and financial information were not stored on the device and remained secure at all times. The breach was limited to names, birth dates, and diagnosis information. No reports have been received to...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 14, 2018An oversight has caused a database used by Cerebral Palsy Research Foundation of Kansas (CPRF) to have its security protections removed for a period of 10 months, exposing the protected health information (PHI) of 8,300 patients. The vulnerable demographic database was discovered on March 10, 2018 and was immediately secured. The investigation into the breach determined that while the database had been created on a secure subdomain in early 2000, when CPRF switched its servers in 2017 the database was not identified resulting in the accidental removal of security protections. During the time that the database was vulnerable it is possible that personal and health information was accessed by unauthorized individuals. The breach was limited to personal information and personal health information relating to the type of disability suffered by patients. No financial information or donor information was exposed. Individuals affected by the breach had received services from CPRF between 2001 and 2010. It is unclear whether any of the exposed information was accessed by unauthorized...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 10, 2018The past few weeks have seen a significant rise in successful phishing attacks on healthcare organizations. In a little over four weeks there have been 10 major email hacking incidents reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights, each of which has resulted in the exposure and potential theft of more than 500 healthcare records. Those ten incidents alone have seen almost 90,000 healthcare records compromised. Recent Email Hacking and Phishing Attacks on Healthcare Organizations HIPAA-Covered Entity Records Exposed Inogen Inc. 29,529 Knoxville Heart Group 15,995 USACS Management Group Ltd 15,552 UnityPoint Health 16,429 Texas Health Physicians Group 3,808 Scenic Bluffs Health Center 2,889 ATI Holdings LLC 1,776 Worldwide Insurance Services 1,692 Billings Clinic 949 Diagnostic Radiology & Imaging, LLC 800 The Oregon Clinic Undisclosed   So far this year there have been three data breaches involving the hacking of email accounts that have exposed more than 30,000 records. Agency for Health Care Administration suffered a 30,000-record breach in...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 8, 2018A class action lawsuit has been filed in response to a data breach at UnityPoint Health that saw the protected health information (PHI) of 16,429 patients exposed and potentially obtained by unauthorized individuals. As with many other healthcare data breaches, PHI was exposed as a result of employees falling for phishing emails. UnityPoint Health discovered the security breach on February 15, 2018 and sent breach notification letters to affected patients two months later, on or around April 16, 2018. HIPAA-covered entities have up to 60 days following the discovery of a data breach to issue notifications to patients. Many healthcare organizations wait before issuing breach notifications and submitting reports of the incident to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights. Waiting for two months to issue notifications to breach victims could be viewed as a violation of HIPAA Rules. While the maximum time limit for reporting was not exceeded, the HIPAA Breach Notification Rule requires notifications to be sent ‘without unnecessary delay.’ The HHS’ Office for...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 8, 2018The Silver Spring, MD-based gastroenterology group Capital Digestive Care has discovered one of its business associates uploaded files to a commercial cloud server that lacked appropriate security controls, exposing the protected health information of up to 17,639 patients. The availability of sensitive patient data over the Internet was brought to the attention of Capital Digestive Care on February 23, 2018 and action was promptly taken to secure the files and prevent further unauthorized access. An investigation into the privacy breach was launched to determine the types of information that had been exposed and the number of patients impacted. The investigation confirmed some sensitive data had been exposed, although the breach was limited to individuals that had visited its website and submitted information via the Schedule a Visit and Contact pages on the site. The types of information exposed was limited to names, addresses, email addresses, telephone numbers, and birth dates. Patients may also have had a limited amount of health information exposed. The login page to the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 7, 2018University of Arkansas Medical Sciences (UAMS) has fired three employees over alleged HIPAA violations that saw a patient’s protected health information impermissibly disclosed and published on Facebook. UAMS provides training to all employees to make them aware of their responsibilities with respect to patient privacy and the requirements of HIPAA, yet despite that training, one employee violated the privacy of a patient by disclosing that individual’s name, age, HIV status, employment information, and surgical history to a colleague. That employee shared the information with a friend who uploaded the PHI to Facebook. A third employee allegedly played no part in the violation but was aware of the disclosures yet failed to report the incident to the hospital. The hospital took prompt action when the HIPAA violations were discovered and terminated all three employees for violating HIPAA Rules and the hospital’s code of conduct. The hospital is taking steps to ensure similar incidents are prevented and is working with the patient to resolve the privacy violation. The motives of the...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 4, 2018The quarterly breach barometer report from Protenus provides insights into the extent to which insiders are violating HIPAA Rules and snooping on patient health information. The Breach Barometer report is compiled using breach data supplied by Databreaches.net and proprietary data collected through the artificial intelligence platform developed by Protenus that allows healthcare organizations to track and analyze employee EHR activity. Insider breaches are a major problem in healthcare, yet many insider breaches go undetected. When insider breaches are identified, it is often months after the breach has occurred. One healthcare employee was recently discovered to have been accessing medical records without authorization for 14 years. 1.13 Million Patient Records Exposed in Q1, 2018 The latest Breach Barometer report shows the records of 1,129,744 patients and health plan members has been viewed by unauthorized individuals, exposed, or stolen in the first quarter of 2018. Data breaches occurred at a rate of more than one per day, with 110 healthcare data breaches reported in Q1....Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 4, 2018An unauthorized individual has gained access to the email account of an employee of Scenic Bluffs Community Health Centers and potentially viewed the protected health information of up to 2,889 patients. The email account breach was discovered by the health centers on March 1, 2018, the day after access to the account was gained. The attacker had set up a mail forwarder on the account, which had forwarded 44 messages to an email address controlled by the attacker. None of the forwarded emails contained any protected health information and following the discovery of the mail forwarding rule it was deleted, the account was closed, and all PHI was secured. While no PHI appeared to have been obtained by the attacker, it is possible that during the time that access to the email account was possible, PHI detailed in the emails could potentially have been viewed. It is unclear how access to the email account was gained. Typically email accounts are compromised after employees respond to phishing emails and inadvertently disclose their login credentials, or via brute force attacks that...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 3, 2018Maximus Inc, a provider of business process management and technology solutions to government health and human services agencies, is alerting more than 3,000 individuals that some of their protected health information has been accidentally disclosed to other individuals as a result of a printing error on a recent mailing. The mailing was prepared and sent by its business associate, Business Ink, between February 10 and February 13, 2018. The mailing was sent to approximately 1,100 families in Texas who participated in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). The error was discovered by Maximus on February 16. The 6-page letter included one mismatched page that included information relating to another individual. The types of information detailed on the page were limited to names, addresses, group numbers, case numbers, and program type. No highly sensitive information such as Social Security numbers, birth dates, insurance information, or financial information was exposed, and none of the information detailed on the mismatched pages would allow another...Posted By HIPAA Journal on May 3, 2018Three websites used by Florida Hospital have been infected with malware that has potentially allowed the threat actors behind the attack to obtain patients’ protected health information. PHI access has not been confirmed and no reports have been received to suggest any protected health information has been misused. Patients are being informed of the breach and, out of an abundance of caution, have been offered complimentary credit monitoring services. The websites impacted are FloridaBariatric.com, FHOrthoInstitute.com and FHExecutiveHealth.com. The data potentially compromised was limited and did not involve any financial information. Potentially, patients’ names, birth dates, email addresses, phone numbers, insurance carriers, the last four digits of their social security numbers, any comments uploaded via the sites, and their height and weight have potentially been obtained by the attackers. The malware attack was limited to the above websites and no other systems were affected. It is unclear what type of malware was uploaded to the websites and how long the malware was present...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 27, 2018A bizarre mistake by the Texas Health and Human Services Commission has seen a former employee sent the protected health information of approximately 100 patients after she had been fired. She was sent boxes containing items that had been collected from her old desk, but was also sent a box of benefits application forms. After Tracy Ryans, 51, of Houston, was terminated, HHSC mailed her two boxes containing her personal items, which were left on her porch by the delivery driver. One of the boxes contained personal belongings that included pens, a coffee cup, and old shoes. The other box contained paperwork. Ryans told the Texas Tribune that one of the boxes contained personal items that did not belong to her. They had been taken from a desk she shared with coworkers. The other box was full of paperwork containing highly sensitive personal information of clients. The paperwork included benefits applications that included the Social Security numbers, billing statements, copies of driver’s licenses, and check stubs relating to approximately 100 individuals. The documents were dated...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 26, 2018Center for Orthopaedic Specialists is notifying its patients that some of their protected health information was potentially accessed by unauthorized individuals who installed ransomware on its network. The attack impacts all current and former patients of three of its facilities in West Hills, Simi Valley and Westlake Village in California. According to Databreaches.net, 85,000 patients have potentially been impacted. Center for Orthopaedic Specialists was notified by its IT vendor that an unauthorized individual began attempting to access its network on February 18, 2018. Access to the network was gained and ransomware was installed, which was used to encrypt a wide range of files, many of which contained the protected health information of patients. The types of information encrypted by the ransomware included names, details about medical records, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers. Prompt action was taken by the IT vendor to limit the harm caused and the affected system was taken offline rapidly to prevent any exfiltration of data. An investigation into the breach has...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 25, 2018A transcription service provider has inadvertently left medical records and patient notes unsecured and freely accessible via a physician portal, which should have been password protected. The error has resulted in the exposure of thousands of patients’ PHI. MEDantex provides medical transcription services to many hospitals and physicians, many of whom choose to upload audio files to the MEDantex website. The audio files are accessed by the firm’s employees and transcribed, and documents containing the transcribed notes are uploaded to the portal where they can be downloaded by providers. In order to gain access the portal, a user must be authenticated by means of a password. According to a report on KrebsOnSecurity, certain portions of the website were recently discovered to lack any authentication controls. Anyone visiting the website could, through their browser, gain access to patient data stored on the site. Brian Krebs reports that several of the tools used by MEDantex staff and could also be accessed and used by unauthorized individuals. Those tools allowed unauthorized...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 24, 2018The first three months of 2018 have seen 77 healthcare data breaches reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights (OCR). Those breaches have impacted more than one million patients and health plan members – Almost twice the number of individuals that were impacted by healthcare data breaches in Q4, 2017. There was a 10.5% fall in the number of data breaches reported quarter over quarter, but the severity of breaches increased. The mean breach size increased by 130.57% and there was a 15.37% increase in the median breach size. In Q4, 2017, the mean breach size was 6,048 healthcare records and the median breach size was 1,666 records. In Q1, 2018, the mean breach size was 13,945 records and the median breach size was 1,922 records. Between January 1 and March 31, 2018, 1,073,766 individuals had their PHI exposed, viewed, or stolen compared to 520,141 individuals in Q4, 2017. Individuals Impacted by Healthcare Data Breaches in Q1, 2018 Throughout 2017, healthcare data breaches were occurring at a rate of more than one per day. Compared to 2017,...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 20, 20181,071 patients who received medical services at the Des Moines Crisis Observation Center operated by Polk County Health Services Inc., have been informed that some of their protected health information has been “accidentally and unknowingly disseminated” over a period of three and a half years. The breach was discovered on February 14, 2018, although the investigation revealed that information first started being disclosed on June 1, 2014 and continued until January 11, 2018. The types of information disclosed includes patients’ names along with Social Security numbers, home addresses, Medicaid ID numbers, admission dates, and discharge locations. Through the Crisis Observation Center, Polk County Health Services provides mental health services for residents of Polk County, IA and is the regional administrator and governing board for mental health and disability services for the county. Polk County Health Services is aware of the individual(s) to whom the information has been disclosed and was able to determine exactly the types of information that has been received by those...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 19, 2018The California Department of Developmental Services (DDS) is notifying 582,174 patients that their protected health information has potentially been compromised. On February 11, 2018, thieves broke into the DDS legal and audits offices in Sacramento, CA. During the time the thieves were in the offices they potentially had access to the sensitive information of approximately 15,000 employees, contractors, job applicants, and parents of minors who receive DDS services, in addition to the PHI of more than half a million patients. The thieves also stole 12 government computers. It does not appear that the perpetrators were interested in paper records and all computers taken by the thieves were encrypted so data access was not possible. DDS has confirmed that none of the office computers were used to gain access to the department’s network and electronic protected health information remained secure at all times. In its substitute breach notice, DDS explained that its offices were vandalized and a fire was started, which triggered the sprinkler system causing damage to documents and CDs....Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 17, 2018Arlington-based Texas Health Resources, a provider group serving more than 1.7 million patients in North Texas, is notifying ‘fewer than 4,000 patients’ that some of their sensitive information may have been accessed by an unauthorized individual. The data breach occurred as early as October 2017, although it was not discovered until January 17, 2018, when the health system was notified of a breach by law enforcement. The potentially compromised data was saved in email accounts that the attacker had access to for up to three months. The delay in issuing breach notification letters, which would normally have to be issued within 60 days of the discovery of the breach under HIPAA Rules, was at the request of law enforcement. HIPAA covered entities are permitted to delay the issuing of notifications if law enforcement believes such an act would impede an investigation. Law enforcement has only recently given the OK to start sending notifications. It is unclear whether the law enforcement investigation resulted in the apprehension of a suspect. Texas Health Resources explained in its...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 16, 2018There has been a month-over-month increase in healthcare data breaches. In March 2018, 29 security incidents were reported by HIPAA covered entities compared to 25 incidents in February. Even though more data breaches were reported in March, there was a fall in the number of individuals impacted by breaches. March 2018 healthcare data breaches saw 268,210 healthcare records exposed – a 13.13% decrease from the 308,780 records exposed in incidents in February. Causes of March 2018 Healthcare Data Breaches March saw the publication of the Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report which confirmed the healthcare industry is the only vertical where more data breaches are caused by insiders than hackers. That trend continued in March. Unauthorized access/disclosures, loss of devices/records, and improper disposal incidents were behind 19 of the 29 incidents reported – 65.5% of all incidents reported in March. The main cause of healthcare data breaches in March 2018 was unauthorized access/disclosure incidents. 14 incidents were reported, with theft/loss incidents the second main cause...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 16, 2018UnityPoint Health has discovered the email accounts of several employees have been compromised and accessed by unauthorized individuals. Access to the employee email accounts was first gained on November 1, 2017 and continued for a period of three months until February 7, 2018, when the phishing attack was detected and access to the compromised email accounts was blocked. Upon discovery of the phishing attack, UnityPoint Health engaged the services of a computer forensics firm to investigate the scope of the breach and the number of patients impacted. The investigation revealed a wide range of protected health information had potentially been obtained by the attackers, which included names in combination with one or more of the following data elements: Medical record number, date of birth, service dates, treatment information, surgical information, lab test results, diagnoses, provider information, and insurance information. The security breach has yet to appear on the Department of Health and Human Services’ breach portal, so it is currently unclear exactly how many patients have...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 16, 2018Inogen, a manufacturer of portable oxygen concentrators, has discovered an unauthorized individual has obtained the credentials of an employee and has used them to gain access to the employee’s email account. Phishing and other credentials theft incidents are common in the healthcare sector, although what makes this incident stand out is the number of individuals impacted by the attack. The compromised email account contained the personal information of approximately 30,000 individuals who had previously been provided with oxygen supply devices. The types of information potentially viewed and obtained by the attacker include name, telephone number, address, email address, date of birth, date of death, types of equipment provided, Medicare ID number and health insurance information. Medical records, Social Security numbers, and payment card information were not compromised. Also notable is the length of time it took to discover the breach. Inogen reports that access to the email account was first gained on January 2, 2018 and continued until March 14. Forensic investigators were...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 12, 2018The Chicago, IL-based physiatry group Integrated Rehab Consultants is sending notification letters to certain patients alerting them to the exposure of some of their protected health information, as is required by HIPAA. However, the breach was not discovered in the past 60 days. Integrated Rehab Consultants (IRC) first became aware of the exposure of PHI on December 2, 2016 – 16 months ago. The data – which included patients’ full names, address, date of birth, gender, medical provider information, visit date, visit status, admission date, appointment visit ID, treatment location, procedure code, and diagnosis codes – had been uploaded to a publicly accessible repository. The PHI was discovered by a healthcare security researcher who notified IRC about the breach. Prompt action was taken to remove and secure the data and an investigation was launched to determine how and why the data had been uploaded to an insecure location. That investigation determined that a business associate who had been provided with the PHI had disclosed the information to a third party. It was that...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 11, 2018A former employee of Baptist Health’s West Kendall Baptist Hospital in Miami, FL has been discovered to have stolen the credit card details of patients and used the information to make fraudulent purchases. The misuse of credit cards was discovered by Baptist Health on March 9, 2018 and the matter was referred to Miami-Dade law enforcement and the employee was terminated. Baptist Health has not specified exactly how many patients have been confirmed to have been defrauded by the employee, although 1,480 patients have been sent breach notification letters to alert them to the possibility that their credit card details may have been misused. Any patient who paid for medical services using a credit card with the registration employee between August 2014 and March 2018 have potentially had their name, date of birth, and credit card details stolen and misused. As a precaution, all 1,480 patients have been offered identity theft protection and credit monitoring services for 12 months without charge and have been advised to check their credit card statements carefully for any unauthorized...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 11, 2018A misconfigured security setting on a radiology interface has resulted in the exposure of tens of thousands of patients’ protected health information. Middletown Medical, a multi-specialty physicians’ group based in Middleton, NY, discovered the misconfigured security setting on January 29, 2018. The following day the interface was secured to ensure unauthorized individuals were prevented from accessing patient information. It is unclear for how long patient data was accessible. Middletown Medical says only a limited number of patients’ PHI could have been accessed by unauthorized individuals. Highly sensitive information such as financial data, Social Security numbers, and insurance information were not exposed. The breach was limited to names, client identification numbers, birth dates, confirmation that radiology services had been received by patients, and the dates those services were provided. A limited number of patients also had diagnosis codes, radiology images, and radiology reports exposed. The discovery of the error prompted Middletown Medical to review its polices and...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 11, 2018A former receptionist at a New York dental practice has been sentenced to serve 2 to 6 years in state penitentiary for stealing the protected health information of hundreds of patients. Annie Vuong, 31, was given access to the computer system and dental records of patients in order to complete her work duties. Vuong abused the access rights and stole the PHI of more than 650 patients. That information was passed to her co-defendants who used the data to steal identities and make fraudulent purchases of high value items. Vuong was arrested on February 2, 2015, following a two-and-a-half-year investigation into identity theft by the New York District Attorney’s Office. The theft of data occurred between May and November 2012, when the PHI of 653 patients was taken from the dental office. The types of information stolen included names, birth dates, and Social Security numbers. That information was shared with co-defendant Devin Bazile in an email. Bazile used the information to obtain credit lines from Barclaycard in the victims’ names. Credit ranged from $2,000 to $7,000 per...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 9, 2018Body: Chesapeake Regional Healthcare has discovered two hard drives containing the protected health information (PHI) of approximately 2,100 patients are missing from the Chesapeake Regional Medical Center campus in Chesapeake, Virginia. The data stored on the devices relates to individuals who took part in studies at its Sleep Center between April 2015 and February 2018. It is currently unclear exactly when the hard drives went missing. Chesapeake Regional Healthcare discovered the devices were missing on February 6, 2018. An internal investigation was launched, and a full search of the facility was conducted, but the devices could not be located. The missing hard drives have been reported as lost/stolen to law enforcement, but Chesapeake Regional Healthcare said the probability of the devices being recovered is low and it does not expect the devices to be found. The hard drives were not encrypted. If obtained by a third party, the protected health information of patients could potentially be accessed. The types of information stored on the devices includes names, demographic...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 6, 2018Oregon has updated its data breach notification law to improve protections for state residents whose personal information is exposed in a data breach. State governor Kate Brown added her signature to Senate Bill (SB 1551) last month, which updates several regulations, notably Oregon’s Breach Notification Law, O.R.S. 646A.604 and Information Security Law, O.R.S. 646A.622. The updates will become effective in June 2018. Prior to the update, Oregon data breach notification law only applied to persons who own or license personal information. Now, the definition of a person is “an individual, private or public corporation, partnership, cooperative, association, estate, limited liability company, organization or other entity, whether or not organized to operate at a profit, or a public body as defined in ORS 174.109.” A data breach is defined as “an unauthorized acquisition of computerized data that materially compromises the security, confidentiality or integrity of personal information that a person maintains.” The definition of personal information has been expanded to include a first...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 3, 2018Verizon has released its annual Protected Health Information Breach Report which delves deep into the main causes of breaches, why they occur, the motivations of internal and external threat actors, and the main threats to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of PHI. For the report, Verizon analyzed 1,368 healthcare data breaches and incidents where protected health information (PHI) was exposed but not necessarily compromised. The data came from 27 countries, although three quarters of the breached entities were based in the United States where there are stricter requirements for reporting PHI incidents. In contrast to all other industry sectors, the healthcare industry is unique as the biggest security threat comes from within. Insiders were responsible for almost 58% of all breaches with external actors confirmed as responsible for just 42% of incidents. The main reason for insider breaches is financial gain. PHI is stolen to commit identity theft, credit card fraud, insurance fraud, and tax fraud. Verizon determined that 48% of all internal incidents were conducted...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 3, 2018Cambridge Health Alliance (CHA) in Massachusetts has been notified by law enforcement that the protected health information of some of its patients has been discovered in the possession of an unauthorized individual. On January 31, 2018, Everett Massachusetts Police Department notified CHA that files containing the PHI of some of its patients had been discovered in the possession of an individual unauthorized to have the information. After being notified of the breach, CHA conducted an internal investigation into the breach and examined the files. At least one of the files contained PHI related to billing which included patients’ names, addresses, dates of birth, Social Security numbers, employer information, charges for healthcare services, and discharge dates. The data related to billing from 2013. According to a breach notice sent to affected individuals by the law firm BakerHostetler on behalf of CHA, the breach impacted four individuals in New Hampshire, all of whom have been offered complimentary credit monitoring and identity theft protection services through Experian. While...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Apr 2, 2018A phishing attack on CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield has resulted in the exposure of 6,800 plan members’ protected health information. The attack was detected by CareFirst on March 12, 2018, prompting a thorough investigation, which included a forensic analysis of the email system and CareFirst’s systems in general. In addition to the internal investigation by the CareFirst IT security team, a third-party information security firm also investigated the attack. The analyses did not uncover any evidence to suggest emails in the compromised account had been opened by the attacker; however, the emails in the account did contain some protected health information and data access could not be ruled out with a high degree of certainty. Once access to the account was gained, the attacker sent phishing emails to individuals in a contact list. Those individuals were not employed by or affiliated with CareFirst BCBS. The emails were sent with the intention of gaining further login credentials. No malware was involved. While 6,800 individuals have potentially been impacted by the incident,...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 30, 2018There have been 955 major security breaches in healthcare in the last three years that have resulted in the exposure/theft of 135,060,443 healthcare records. More than 41% of the population of the United States have had some of their protected health information exposed as a result of those breaches, which have been occurring at a rate of almost one a day over the past three years. There has been a steady rise in reported security beaches in healthcare in the last three years. In 2015 there were 270 data breaches involving more than 500 records reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights. The figure rose to 327 security breaches in 2016, and 342 security breaches in 2017. More healthcare security breaches are being reported than at any other time since HIPAA required covered entities to disclose data breaches, although the number of individuals affected by healthcare data breaches has been declining year-over year for the past three years. In 2015, a particularly bad year for healthcare industry data breaches, 112,107,579 healthcare records were...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 30, 2018The Arc of Erie County New York (The Arc), a provider of person-centered services to individuals with developmental disabilities, has discovered two spreadsheets containing the protected health information of 3,751 patients were accessible on the Internet without the need for authentication for more than 30 months. Between July 2015 and February 2018, the two spreadsheets could be accessed over the Internet by unauthorized individuals as a result of a coding error on the website. The coding error saw a link included on the website that allowed the spreadsheets to be accessed. Individuals affected by the breach, many of whom are developmentally disabled, had been enrolled in certain programs offered by The Arc. The Arc spreadsheets contained sensitive information such as names, Social Security numbers and diagnosis codes. When the error was discovered in February, The Arc deactivated the link to prevent any further disclosures of PHI and contacted a computer forensics and data security firm to investigate the breach and help take corrective action to limit the harm caused to...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 30, 2018The Special Agents Mutual Benefit Association (SAMBA) health plan is alerting almost 14,000 individuals about a February 2018 breach of protected health information. The breach affects eligible family members of subscribers who were covered by the Federal Employees Health Benefits Plan in 2017. It is an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirement for SAMBA to mail a copy of Form 1095-B to all plan subscribers each tax year. The form supports plan members’ and covered family members’ compliance with the Affordable Care Act’s individual mandate. The forms for the 2017 tax year were mailed on or soon after February 19, 2018; however, a programming error resulted in the forms being populated with information relating to other subscribers’ family members. Instead of detailing the subscribers’ family members covered by their health plan, the forms included the names and Social Security numbers of other subscribers’ family members and the dates of health insurance coverage in 2017.  The forms were also incorrectly dated 2016. SAMBA notes that no subscribers’ Social Security numbers were...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 28, 2018Tens of thousands of patients of a New York medical practice have had their protected health information exposed online due to a misconfigured server. It is currently unclear if anyone other than the security researcher who discovered the problem has accessed the data. The server misconfiguration was identified on January 25, 2018 by Chris Vickery, director of cyber risk research at Upguard. In a March 26 blog post Vickery explained that he identified an exposed port typically used for remote synchronization (rsync). While access should have been limited to specific whitelisted IP addresses, the port was misconfigured and allowed anyone to access the data. All that was required to access the server was its IP address. Vickery identified two sections in the repository, one of which – named backupwscohen – was publicly accessible and contained several files that included highly sensitive information. A virtual hard drive was also accessible that was discovered to contain staff details, including spouse information, children’s names, and in some cases, Social Security numbers. An...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 27, 2018A researcher at Vanderbilt University has conducted a study that suggests mortality rates at hospitals increase following a data breach as a result of a drop in the standard of care. The researcher estimates healthcare data breaches may cause as many as 2,100 deaths a year in the United States. The study was conducted by Owen Graduate School of Management researcher, Dr. Sung Choi. The findings of the study were presented at a recent cyberrisk quantification conference at Philadelphia’s Drexel University LeBow College of Business. Cyberattacks can have a direct impact on patient care, which has been clearly highlighted on numerous occasions over the past 12 months. Ransomware and wiper malware attacks have crippled information systems and have forced healthcare providers to cancel appointments, while the lack of access to patient health records can cause treatment delays. Notable attacks that caused major disruption were the NotPetya wiper and WannaCry ransomware attacks last year, with the latter causing major problems for the National Health Service in the UK. Choi explained that...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 26, 2018An alleged healthcare data breach that saw the protected health information of patients of CVS Caremark exposed has resulted in legal action against CVS, Caremark, and its mailing vendor, Fiserv. The lawsuit, which was filed in Ohio federal court on March 21, 2018, relates to an alleged privacy breach that occurred as a result of an error that affected a July/August 2017 mailing sent to approximately 6,000 patients. In July 2017, CVS Caremark was contracted to operate as the pharmacy benefits manager for the Ohio HIV Drug Assistance Program (PhDAP), and under that program, CVS Caremark provides eligible patients with HIV medications and communicates with them about prescriptions. In July/August 2017, CSV Caremark’s mailing vendor Fiserve sent letters to patients containing their membership cards and information about how they could obtain their HIV medications. In the lawsuit the complaint alleges HIV-related information was clearly visible through the plastic windows of the envelopes, allowing the information to be viewed by postal service workers, family members, and roommates....Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 26, 2018An unencrypted laptop computer issued to an employee of Clinical Pathology Laboratories Southeast, Inc., (CPLSE) has been stolen, exposing the protected health information of certain patients and their payment guarantors. Prompt action was taken by CPLSE to prevent the laptop from being used to connect to its network and the theft was reported to law enforcement; however, it is possible that the protected health information stored on the laptop could have been viewed by unauthorized individuals. An internal investigation was conducted to determine the types of information stored on the device which indicated the following PHI elements were potentially exposed: Names, addresses, driver’s license numbers, Social Security numbers, government ID numbers, medical record numbers, and medical treatment information. Patients have now been notified of the breach and advised of the steps they can take to protect themselves against misuse of their data. Complimentary credit monitoring and identity theft protection services have been offered to affected individuals. Steps have also been taken...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 22, 2018ATI Physical Therapy has discovered the protected health information of more than 35,000 patients has potentially been compromised when threat actors gained access to the email accounts of some of its employees. A security breach was identified on January 18, 2018 when ATI Physical Therapy discovered the direct deposit information of some of its employees had been changed in its payroll platform. Prompt action was taken to protect its employees and external forensic investigators were called in to determine the full extent and scope of the breach. The investigation revealed the email accounts of certain employees had been compromised and were accessed by unauthorized individuals between January 9 and January 12, 2018. An analysis of the emails in the accounts revealed they contained the protected health information of tens of thousands of patients. The types of information potentially compromised varied per impacted individual, but may have included names, dates of birth, credit/debit card numbers, driver’s license numbers, state ID numbers, Social Security numbers,...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 21, 2018Protenus has published its February Healthcare Breach Barometer Report. The report includes healthcare data breaches reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights or disclosed to the media in February 2018. The report, compiled from data collected from databreaches.net, indicates at least 348,889 healthcare records were confirmed as breached in February, although that figure will be considerably higher as the number of people affected by 11 breaches is not yet known. There were 39 security breaches involving protected health information in February – a slight rise from the 37 breaches reported in January, although the number of records exposed was down from January’s total of 473,807 records. Insider breaches continue to pose problems for healthcare providers with 16/39 incidents (41%) involving insiders. Those incidents resulted in the exposure/theft of 51% of all records confirmed as having been exposed or stolen in February. Protenus notes that 94% of insider breaches were the result of errors by healthcare employees, with only one confirmed...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 21, 2018Geneva, NY-based Finger Lakes Health has experienced a ransomware attack that has crippled its computer system. Staff have been forced to work on pen and paper while the health system attempts to remove the malware and restore access to electronic data. The ransomware attack on the health system started at around midnight on Sunday March 18, 2018, with staff becoming aware of the attack when a ransom demand was issued by the attackers. Finger Lakes Health operates Geneva General Hospital and Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hospital in Pen Yan and several specialty care practices, primary care physician practices, long-term health facilities, and day care centers in upstate New York. It is unclear exactly how many facilities have been impacted by the ransomware attack. Finger Lakes Health has developed emergency procedures for attack scenarios such as this, which were immediately implemented when the attack was discovered. On March 20, the health system issued a statement to local media channels about the attack explaining that while some of its information systems were...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 20, 2018Beverly Hills, CA-based RoxSan Pharmacy has notified 1,049 patients that some of their protected health information has been disclosed to a business associate via unencrypted email. The notification letters were mailed to affected individuals last month, although the incident occurred on January 20, 2015. In a recent press release, RoxSan explained that affected individuals are being notified in “as timely a manner as possible”. The delay in issuing notifications was due to “the protected nature of the forensic investigation”. It is unclear when RoxSan Pharmacy became aware of the error. The protected health information was included in a data file that was sent to a single individual – A business associate of the pharmacy – who worked in the legal field. That individual had signed a business associate agreement with the pharmacy and was aware of the responsibilities of HIPAA with respect to patients’ PHI. However, the PHI was exposed as the data file was sent via unencrypted email. The data file only contained a limited amount of protected health information and did not...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 20, 2018We have compiled healthcare data breach statistics from October 2009 when the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights first started publishing summaries of healthcare data breaches on its website. The healthcare data breach statistics below only include data breaches of 500 or more records as smaller breaches are not published by OCR. The breaches include closed cases and breaches still being investigated by OCR. Our healthcare data breach statistics clearly show there has been an upward trend in data breaches over the past 9 years, with 2017 seeing more data breaches reported than any other year since records first started being published. There have also been notable changes over the years in the main causes of breaches. The loss/theft of healthcare records and electronic protected health information dominated the breach reports between 2009 and 2015, although better policies and procedures and the use of encryption has helped reduce these easily preventable breaches. Our healthcare data breach statistics show the main causes of healthcare data breaches...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 19, 2018Our February 2018 healthcare data breach report details the major data breaches reported by healthcare providers, health plans, and business associates in February 2018. Summary of February 2018 Healthcare Data Breaches February may have been a shorter month, but there was an increase in the number of healthcare data breaches reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights. In February, HIPAA covered entities and business associates reported 25 breaches – a 19% month on month increase in breaches. While there was a higher breach tally this month, the number of healthcare records exposed as a result of healthcare data breaches fell by more than 100,000. In January 428,643 healthcare records were exposed. February 2018 healthcare data breaches saw 308,780 healthcare records exposed. Largest Healthcare Data Breaches of February 2018 The largest healthcare data breaches reported to the Office for Civil Rights in February are listed below. Covered Entity Covered Entity Type Individuals Affected Type of Breach Location of PHI St. Peter’s Surgery...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 18, 2018Primary Health Care Inc., a non-profit network of community health centers in Des Moines, Marshalltown and Ames, IA, has discovered malicious actors have gained access to the email accounts of four employees and have potentially viewed or obtained patients’ protected health information. Primary Health Care issued a press release and uploaded a substitute breach notice to its website on March 16, 2018 explaining the breach occurred on February 28, 2017. The breach was detected the following day on March 1, 2017. Primary Health Care is in the process of notifying affected patients and will be reporting the incident to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights. No explanation is provided as to why the breach took a year to report. Primary Health Care responded quickly to the breach and terminated access to the compromised email accounts and hired a third-party computer forensics expert to conduct an investigation into the attack. The investigation revealed access to four email accounts and their associated Google Drives was gained by the attacker(s),...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 15, 2018A ShopRite pharmacy in Millville, New Jersey has discovered an electronic device used to capture the signatures of customers has been disposed of without first wiping the device of all stored protected health information. A limited amount of protected health information was stored on the device, which included patients’ names, dates of birth, phone numbers, zip codes, prescription numbers, medication names, signatures, date and time of collection/delivery, and in some cases, details of over-the-counter medications containing pseudoephedrine (PSE). The device was used by customers to acknowledge the store’s privacy policy and payment for prescriptions by insurance carriers. Information was also collected on sales of products containing PSE to meet legal requirements. Individuals affected by the incident had collected prescriptions or purchased PSE products between 2007 and 2013. The device was disposed of in June 2016. The improper disposal of the device is not understood to have resulted in PHI being compromised and no reports of PHI access or misuse have been received by ShopRite,...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 14, 2018QuadMed, a Wisconsin-based provider of medical, laboratory, pharmacy, fitness, and physical therapy services, has discovered the protected health information of 9,854 patients has potentially been impermissibly disclosed to certain employees. In November 2013, QuadMed took over an onsite clinic at Hillenbrand Inc. Occupational health information of employees of the Batesville, IN-based manufacturer was maintained in an electronic medical record system and access to the system was shared with QuadMed. Certain QuadMed employees required access to the data for the administration of occupational health matters. Take overs of clinics at WI-based Stoughton Trailers and Whirlpool Corporation’s Clyde, OH plant also saw occupational health-related information in EMRs shared with the firm and made accessible to some of its employees. On December 26, 2017, QuadMed discovered a technical issue affected the PHI stored in the EMRs used at the Hillenbrand and Stoughton Trailers clinics which allowed its employees to access more than the minimum necessary amount of PHI than was permissible....Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 13, 2018The protected health information of 33,420 patients of BJC Healthcare has been accessible on the Internet for eight months without any need for authentication to view the information. BJC Healthcare is one of the largest not-for profit healthcare systems in the United States. The St. Louis-based healthcare organization runs two nationally recognized hospitals in Missouri – Barnes-Jewish Hospital and St. Louis Children’s Hospital along with 13 others. The health system employs more than 31,000 individuals, has over 154,000 hospital admissions and performs more than 175,000 home health visits a year. On January 23, 2018, BJC Healthcare performed a security scan which revealed one of its servers had been misconfigured which allowed sensitive information to be accessed without authentication. Action was immediately taken to reconfigure and secure the server to prevent data from being accessed. The investigation revealed an error had been made configuring the server on May 9, 2017, leaving documents and copies of identification documents accessible. Highly sensitive...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 9, 2018HIMSS has published the results of its annual healthcare cybersecurity survey, which provides insights into the state of cybersecurity in healthcare and identifies the top healthcare security threats. The HIMSS 2018 cybersecurity survey was conducted on 239 respondents from the healthcare industry between December 2017 and January 2018. The results of the survey were announced at the HIMSS 2018 Conference & Exhibition in Las Vegas. 36.8% of respondents had positions in executive management and 37.2% were employed in non-executive management positions. The remaining 25.9% were in non-management positions such as cybersecurity specialists and analysts. 41.2% of respondents were primarily responsible for cybersecurity, 32.6% had some responsibility, and 11.8% sometimes had responsibility for cybersecurity. Most Healthcare Organizations Have Experienced a Significant Security Incident in the Past 12 Months The threat of healthcare cyberattacks is greater than ever and the past 12 months has been a torrid year. In the past 12 months, 75.7% of respondents said they had experienced a...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 8, 2018The Alabama Data Breach Notification Act (Senate Bill 318) has advanced for consideration by the House of Representatives after being unanimously passed by the Alabama Senate last week. Alabama is one of two states that has yet to introduce legislation that requires companies to issue notifications to individuals whose personal information is exposed in data breaches. The other state – South Dakota – is also considering introducing similar legislation to protect state residents. The Alabama Data Breach Notification Act, proposed by Sen. Arthur Orr (R-Decatur), requires companies doing business in the state of Alabama to issue notifications to state residents when their sensitive personal information has been exposed and it is reasonably likely to result in breach victims coming to substantial harm. Entities that would be required to comply with the Alabama Data Breach Notification Act are persons, sole proprietorships, partnerships, government entities, corporations, non-profits, trusts, estates, cooperative associations, and other business entities that acquire or use sensitive...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 7, 2018A 2016 mailing error by EmblemHealth that saw the Health Insurance Claim Numbers of 81,122 plan members printed on the outside of envelopes has resulted in a $575,000 settlement with the New York Attorney General. While all mailings include a unique patient identifier on the envelope, in this case the potential for harm was considerable as Health Insurance Claim numbers are formed using the Social Security numbers of plan members. Announcing the settlement, New York Attorney General Eric T. Schneiderman explained that Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Rules require HIPAA covered entities to implement administrative, physical, and technical safeguards to ensure the confidentiality of patients’ and plan members’ protected health information. The error that saw Social Security numbers exposed violated HIPAA Rules. EmblemHealth failed to comply with “many standards and procedural specifications” required by HIPAA. Attorney General Schneiderman also said that printing Social Security numbers on the outside of envelopes violated New York General Business Law §...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 6, 2018Two email-related data breaches have been reported that have resulted in the disclosure of the protected health information of more than 16,000 individuals. Flexible Benefit Service Corporation Breach Impacts 5,123 Individuals Flexible Benefit Service Corporation (Flex), a Chicago-Il-based general agency and benefit administrator serving health insurance carriers, has announced the discovery of a phishing attack that resulted in an unauthorized individual gaining access to a corporate email account. The security breach was detected on December 6, 2017 when an email account of a company employee was discovered to be sending phishing emails. The email account was compromised after a single employee responded to a phishing email and disclosed login credentials to the email account. A third-party forensics firm was contracted to conduct an investigation into the breach and ascertain the extent of the attacker’s activities. The investigation highlighted the likely intentions of the attacker. Once access to the email account was gained, the attacker performed searches looking for details...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 6, 2018In this post we explain how to report a HIPAA violation anonymously if you feel your (or someone else’s) privacy has been violated of if HIPAA Rules are not being followed in your organization. When Can an Alleged HIPAA Violation be Reported? Most healthcare organizations go to great lengths to ensure they are in compliance with HIPAA Rules, but occasionally HIPAA regulations are violated by management or employees. In such cases, a complaint can be lodged with the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights (OCR) – the main enforcer of HIPAA Rules. However, complaints will only result in action being taken if the complaint is submitted within 180 days of the date of discovery that HIPAA Rules were violated. In limited cases, when there is ‘good cause’ that it was not possible to file a complaint within 180 days, an extension may be granted. Note that OCR cannot investigate any alleged violation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule that occurred before April 14, 2003 or Security Rule violations that occurred before April 20, 2005 because compliance with those...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 5, 2018A malware infection at St. Peter’s Surgery & Endoscopy Center in New York has potentially allowed hackers to gain access to the medical records of almost 135,000 patients. This is the second largest healthcare data breach of 2018, the largest to hit New York state since the 3,466,120-record data breach at Newkirk Products, Inc. in August 2016, and the fifth largest healthcare data breach in New York since the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights started publishing data breach summaries in October 2009. The data breach at St. Peter’s Surgery & Endoscopy Center was discovered on January 8, 2018: The same day as hackers gained access to its server. The rapid detection of the malware limited the time the hackers had access to the server and potentially prevented patients’ data from being viewed or copied. However, while no evidence of data access or data theft was discovered, it was not possible to rule either out with a high degree of certainty. In its substitute branch notice, St. Peter’s Surgery & Endoscopy Center says the servers it uses...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 2, 2018Tufts Health Plan is alerting 70,320 of its members that their health plan member ID numbers have been exposed. A mailing vendor used by Tufts Health Plan sent Tufts Medicare Preferred ID cards to Medicare Advantage members between December 11, 2017 and January 2, 2018. Window envelopes were used which naturally allowed plan members’ names and addresses to be seen, but Tufts Health Plan member IDs were also visible through the plastic windows of the envelopes. The mailing error was discovered by Tufts Health Plan on January 18. Tufts Health Plan notes that its member IDs are not comprised of Social Security numbers or Medicare numbers, but potentially the member ID numbers could be misused by individuals to receive services covered by the health plan. Legal experts were consulted about the breach to assess the potential risk to plan members. The risk of misuse of the numbers is believed to be very low as the only individuals likely to see the member IDs would be employees of the postal service. Plan members have been told that in the unlikely event that their member IDs are misused...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Mar 1, 2018The latest installment of the Protenus Healthcare Breach Barometer report has been released. Protenus reports that overall, at least 473,807 patient records were exposed or stolen in January, although the number of individuals affected by 11 of the 37 breaches is not yet known. The actual total is likely to be considerably higher, possibly taking the final total to more than half a million records. The report shows insiders are continuing to cause problems for healthcare organizations. Insiders were the single biggest cause of healthcare data breaches in January. Out of the 37 healthcare data breaches reported in January 12 were attributed to insiders – 32% of all data breaches. While insiders were the main cause of breaches, the incidents affected a relatively low number of individuals – just 1% of all records breached. Insiders exposed 6,805 patient records, although figures could only be obtained for 8 of the 12 breaches. 7 incidents were attributed to insider error and five were due to insider wrongdoing. Protenus has drawn attention to one particular insider breach. A nurse...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Feb 28, 2018On December 20, 2017, a ransomware attack on Jemison Internal Medicine of Alabama resulted in electronic health records being encrypted, preventing the healthcare provider from gaining access to patient data. A ransom demand was issued for the keys to unlock the encryption although no payment was made to the attacker. Jemison Internal Medicine had viable backups of electronic protected health information and restored data after reinstalling the operating system on affected computers. An analysis of its system post-data restoration revealed no traces of the malicious software remained. While ransomware attacks are often indiscriminate and occur as a result of employees responding to phishing emails, this attack was more targeted. The investigation into the security breach revealed an unauthorized individual had gained access to Jemison Internal Medicine’s computer system and had access for a period of approximately 3 months. The investigation did not uncover any evidence to suggest the EMR system was accessed by the attacker, although it was not possible to rule out data access with...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Feb 27, 2018According to a recent report in the Post and Courier, the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) terminated 13 employees last year for violating HIPAA Rules by snooping on patient records. In total, there were 58 privacy violations in 2017 at MUSC, all of which have been reported to the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights. All of the breaches affected only small numbers of patients. Out of the 58 breaches, 11 incidents were categorized as snooping on medical records. Other breaches were unauthorized disclosures such as when the health information of a patient is accidentally sent or faxed to the wrong person. Over the past five years, there have been 307 breaches detected at MUSC, resulting in 30 members of non-physician staff being fired. None of the breaches have been listed on the OCR breach portal, which only shows breaches impacting 500 or more individuals. Under HIPAA Rules, all PHI breaches must be reported, although it is only large breaches of more than 500 records that are made public and are detailed on the breach portal. The revelations...Posted By HIPAA Journal on Feb 22, 2018Fresno, CA-based White and Bright Family Dental has discovered one of its servers containing patients’ protected health information has been accessed by hackers. Access to the server was gained by the attackers on January 30, 2018. The Fresno Police Department was immediately notified of the incident “so that identification and prosecution of those involved could begin.” That investigation, along with the internal White and Bright Family Dental investigations, are continuing. The dental practice is also in the process of augmenting its security protections to prevent further incidents of this nature from occurring. While HIPAA covered entities have up to 60 days following the discovery of a breach to issue notifications to patients and the Department of Health and Human Services, White and Bright Family Dental acted quickly and sent notifications in the shortest possible time frame to allow victims to take steps to protect their identities. Letters were sent to patients on February 16 and the state attorney general’s office was notified of the breach on February 19. White and...
HIPAA

Compliance

Checklist
HIPAA Journal provides the most comprehensive coverage of HIPAA news anywhere online, in addition to independent advice about HIPAA compliance and the best practices to adopt to avoid data breaches, HIPAA violations and regulatory fines. HIPAA Journal's goal is to assist HIPAA-covered entities achieve and maintain compliance with state and federal regulations governing the use, storage and disclosure of PHI and PII.Receive weekly HIPAA news directly via emailHIPAA News
Regulatory Changes
Breach News
HITECH News
HIPAA Advice



Email Never Shared
                        Cancel Any TimeCopyright © 2014-2018 HIPAA Journal. All rights reserved.
Whereas news about Internet security often focuses solely on the latest threats or vulnerabilities, in addition to reporting hacks, data breaches and exposures, we also include advice about the best practices organizations should adopt to mitigate the threat from malware and other malicious software.Consequently we strongly advise that individuals and organizations never use the same passwords for different accounts, make passwords as complex as possible and change them frequently. We also recommend that sensitive online accounts have 2-factor authentication whenever possible.Ideally, organizations should implement a web filter to prevent Internet users from accessing websites that could compromise Internet security. With a web filter in place, the potential exists for productivity to increase and also for employees to enjoy a hostility-free workplace environment.Whereas news about Internet security often focuses solely on the latest threats or vulnerabilities, in addition to reporting hacks, data breaches and exposures, we also include advice about the best practices organizations should adopt to mitigate the threat from malware and other malicious software.Consequently we strongly advise that individuals and organizations never use the same passwords for different accounts, make passwords as complex as possible and change them frequently. We also recommend that sensitive online accounts have 2-factor authentication whenever possible.Ideally, organizations should implement a web filter to prevent Internet users from accessing websites that could compromise Internet security. With a web filter in place, the potential exists for productivity to increase and also for employees to enjoy a hostility-free workplace environment.Feb 2, 2017 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Internet Security, Mobile Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |Malware and phishing attacks on healthcare organizations are all but guaranteed. In fact, they are almost as certain as death and taxes. Healthcare organizations hold huge volumes of data on patients and more types of data than virtually any other industry.Healthcare providers store personal information and Social Security numbers, which are needed for identity theft and tax fraud. Insurance information that can be used for health insurance fraud; Medicare/Medicaid numbers and health information that can be used for medical fraud. Bank account information and credit card numbers are also often stored. For cybercriminals, breaching a healthcare organization’s defenses means a big payday.Further, health data does not expire like credit card numbers. Social Security numbers never change. It is therefore no surprise that malware and phishing attacks on healthcare organizations are on the rise.As if there was not enough incentive to attack healthcare organizations, the healthcare industry has underinvested in cybersecurity defenses, lagging behind other industries when it comes to implementing the latest technologies to thwart cybercriminals. Healthcare networks are also highly complex and difficult to protect. They also contain many outdated software and operating systems. Many healthcare organizations still run medical devices on the unsupported Windows XP OS, which contains many vulnerabilities.The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) has helped to bring cybersecurity standards up to an acceptable level. HIPAA compliance has made it harder for cybercriminals, although far from impossible. With the healthcare industry, firmly in cybercriminals’ crosshairs, healthcare organizations need to look beyond meeting the minimum standards for data security to avoid a HIPAA fine and ensure that defenses are improved further still.One of the biggest problems comes from cyberattacks on healthcare employees. Even advanced firewalls can be easily avoided if employees can be fooled into clicking on a malicious link or opening an infected email attachment. Phishing attacks on healthcare organizations are the most common way that cybercriminals gain access to healthcare networks. Most cyberattacks start with a spear phishing email.In addition to perimeter defenses, it is essential for healthcare organizations to employ technologies to block phishing attacks. Advanced spam filters will prevent the vast majority of phishing emails from being delivered, while web filtering solutions will block phishing attacks on healthcare organizations by preventing malicious links from being clicked and malicious websites from being accessed.A web filter can also be configured to block downloads of file types commonly associated with malware: SCR, VB, and JavaScript files for instance. A web filter is also an excellent defense against drive-by malware downloads, social media phishing links, and malvertising.Fortunately, with appropriate defenses in place, cyberattacks can be prevented and the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of ePHI can be preserved.For further information on the major healthcare cyberattacks of 2016, the key threats to healthcare organizations, and the impact of data breaches, click the image below to view our healthcare hacking infographic. Jan 24, 2017 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Internet Security, Network Security |Credential stuffing attacks on enterprises are soaring according to a recent study conducted by Shape Security. The massive data breaches at the likes of LinkedIn, Yahoo, MySpace have provided cybercriminals with passwords aplenty and those passwords are used in these automated brute force login attempts.Organizations that have discovered data breaches rapidly force password-resets to prevent criminals from gaining access to users’ accounts; however, stolen passwords can still be incredibly valuable. A study conducted by Microsoft in 2007 suggested that the average computer user has 25 accounts that require the use of a username and password, while Sophos suggests users have an average of 19 accounts.Password managers can be used to help individuals remember their login credentials, but many people have not signed up for such a service. To remember passwords people just recycle them and use the same password over and over again. Cybercriminals are well aware of that fact and use stolen passwords in credential stuffing attacks on websites and mobile applications.Shape Security suggests that for many enterprises, 90% of login traffic comes from credential stuffing attacks. Those attacks can be highly effective and since they are automated, they require little effort on the part of the attacker. A batch of passwords is purchased from any number of sellers and resellers on darknet marketplaces. A target site is identified and an automated script is developed to login. The criminals then scale up the assault by renting a botnet. It is then possible to conduct hundreds of thousands of login attempts simultaneously.Many of the stolen credentials are old, so there is a high probability that passwords will have been changed, but not always. Many people keep the same passwords for years.The success rate may be low, but the scale of the credential stuffing attacks gives cybercriminals access to hundreds of thousands of accounts.Shape Security researchers suggest the success rate of these attacks is around 2%. To put this into perspective, if the passwords from the Yahoo data breach were used in credential stuffing attacks, which they almost certainly are, a success rate of 2% would give criminals access to 20 million user accounts.There is certainly no shortage of passwords to attempt to use to gain access to accounts. According to the report, more than 3 billion username and password combinations were stolen by cybercriminals in 2016 alone. That would potentially give the attackers access to 60 million accounts.These attacks are not hypothetical. During a 4-month observation period of just one major U.S. retailer in 2016, Shape Security discovered that 15.5 million attempted logins occurred. Even more worrying was that more than 500,000 of the retailer’s customers were using recycled passwords that had previously been stolen from other websites.Additionally, as a recent report from SplashData has shown, weak passwords continue to be used. The top 25 list of the worst passwords in 2016 still contains very weak passwords such as 123456 and password. These commonly used passwords will also be attempted in brute force attacks. SplashData suggests as many as 10% of Internet users use at least one of the passwords in the top 25 worst password list.These studies highlight the seriousness of the risk of recycling passwords and send a clear message to organizations: Develop mitigations to prevent the use of stolen credentials and ensure that password policies are developed and enforced.Jan 23, 2017 | Internet Security, Web Filtering |Internet censorship laws in two U.S. states may be augmented, forcing Internet service providers and device manufacturers to implement technology that blocks obscene material from being viewed on Internet-connected devices.North Dakota has recently joined South Carolina in proposing stricter Internet censorship laws to restrict state residents’ access to pornography. There is growing support for stricter Internet censorship laws in both states to block pornography and websites that promote prostitution, and it is believed that stricter Internet censorship laws will help reduce human trafficking in the states.The new Internet censorship laws would not prevent state residents from accessing pornography on their laptops, computers and smartphones, as the technology would only be required on new devices sold in the two states. Any new device purchased would be required to have “digital blocking capability” to prevent obscene material from being accessed. Should the new Internet censorship laws be passed, state residents would be required to pay $20 to have the Internet filter removed.The proposed law in North Dakota – Bill 1185 – classifies Internet Service Provider’s routers and all laptops, computers, smartphones, and gaming devices that connect to the Internet as “pornographic vending machines” and the proposed law change would treat those devices as such. The bill would also require device manufacturers to block ‘prostitution hubs’ and websites that facilitate human trafficking. If passed, the ban on the sale of non-filtered Internet devices would be effective from August 1, 2017.Lifting of the block would only be possible if a request to remove the Internet filter was made in writing, the individual’s age was verified in a face to face encounter, and if a $20 fee was paid. Individual wishing to lift the block would also be required to receive a written warning about the dangers of removing the Internet filter.The fees generated by the state would be directed to help offset the harmful social effects of obscene website content, such as funding the housing, legal and employment costs of victims of child exploitation and human trafficking. Fees would be collected at point of sale.Device manufacturers would have a duty to maintain their Internet filter to ensure that it continues to remain fully functional, but also to implement policies and procedures to unblock non-obscene website content that has accidentally been blocked by filtering software. A system would also be required to allow requests to be made to block content that has somehow bypassed the Internet filtering controls. Requests submitted would need to be processed in a reasonable time frame. Failure to process the requests promptly would see the company liable to pay a $500 fine per website/webpage.State Representative Bill Chumley (R‑Spartanburg) introduced similar updates in South Carolina last month, proposing changes to the state’s Human Trafficking Prevention Act. Both states will now subject the proposed bills to review by their respective House Judiciary Committees.Jan 8, 2017 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |Companies must now deal with a new ransomware threat: 2017 is likely to see a proliferation of doxware attacks.2016 was the year when cybercriminals fully embraced ransomware and used it to devastating effect on many organizations. As 2016 started, the healthcare industry was heavily targeted. Cybercriminals rightly assumed that the need for healthcare professionals to access patient data would mean ransom payments would likely be paid. That was certainly the case with Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center. An attack resulted in a ransom of $17,000 being paid to allow the medical center to regain access to patient data and computer systemsHospitals throughout the United States continued to be attacked, but not only in the United States, Attacks spread to the United Kingdom and Germany. The education sector was also hit heavily. Many schools and universities were attacked and were forced to pay ransoms to obtain keys to unlock their data.Between April 2015 and March 2016, Kaspersky Lab reported that ransomware infections rose by 17.7%. The figures for April 2016 to March 2017 are likely to show an even bigger rise.  Ransomware has rarely been out of the news headlines all year.Cybercriminals are making stealthier and more sophisticated ransomware variants to avoid detection and cause more widespread disruption. Widespread media coverage, warnings by security companies and law enforcement agencies, and the likely costs of dealing with attacks has led many companies to improve their defenses and develop strategies to recover from infections.With ransom demands of tens of thousands of dollars – or in some cases hundreds of thousands of dollars – and widespread attacks, the threat can no longer be ignoredOne of the best ways of avoiding having to pay a sizeable ransom is to ensure data are backed up. Should ransomware be installed, IT departments can wipe their systems, restore files from backups, and make a quick recovery.Ransomware is only an effective income generator for cybercriminals if ransoms are paid. If companies can easily recover, and restoring data from backups is cheaper than paying a ransom, cybercriminals will have to look elsewhere to make their money.However, ransomware is far from dead. Cybercriminasl are changing their tactics. Ransomware is still being used to encrypt data, but an extra incentive is being added to the mix to increase the chance of a ransom being paid.Doxware, like ransomware, encrypts data and a ransom demand is issued. However, in addition to encrypting data, information is also stolen. The gangs behind these attacks up the ante by threatening to publish sensitive data if the ransom is not paid.If access is gained to corporate emails or other electronic conversations, the potential harm that can be caused is considerable. Reputation damage from doxware can be considerable, making payment of a ransom far more preferable to recovering data from a backup. If intellectual property is stolen and published the consequences for a company could be catastrophic.2016 has already seen extortion attempts by hackers who have infiltrated networks, stolen data, and threatened its release if ransom payments are not made. TheDarkOverlord attacks on healthcare providers are just one example. However, in those attacks data were simply stolen. The combination of data theft with ransomware would be more likely to see ransoms paid. Already we have seen ransomware variants that combine an information stealing component and 2017 is likely to see the problem get far worse.Dec 9, 2016 | Cybersecurity Advice, Internet Security, Web Filtering |The increase in cyberattacks and proliferation of web-borne threats has made web filtering for Managed Service Providers one of the most important, and profitable, opportunities for MSPs. However, not all MSPs have started offering a web filtering service to their clients, even though web filtering is now an essential cybersecurity defenseWhy is web filtering for Managed Service Providers now so important? Listed below – and in a useful infographic – are some of the reasons why businesses need to control the websites that can be visited by their employees and why web filtering for Managed Service Providers is an important addition to any MSPs service stack.Email remains one of the most likely routes that malware can be installed. Malicious email volume is growing and in Q3, 2016, Proofpoint discovered 96.8% of malicious attachments were used to download Locky ransomware. Blocking malicious spam email messages is therefore an essential element of any organization’s cybersecurity defense strategy. However, times are a changing. The threat from web-borne attacks has increased significantly in the past few years.Cybercriminals are well aware that most organizations now use a spam filter to block malicious messages and that they now conduct end user training to warn employees of the risks of opening email attachments or clicking on hyperlinks sent by strangers.However, far fewer businesses have implemented a solution that blocks web-borne threats. Consequently, cybercriminals have changed their focus from email to the Internet.The shift to the web means cybercriminals can reach a much bigger target audience and can spread malware and ransomware more effectively. The extent of this paradigm shift is deeply concerning.Now, more than 80% of malware is web-related and spread via malicious web adverts, hijacked websites, and websites that have been created with the sole purpose of infecting visitors with malware.As TitanHQ CTO Neil Farrell points out, “the average business user now encounters 3 malicious links per day.” Those links are rarely identified as malicious and the malware downloads that result from visiting malicious websites go undetected.Cybercriminals use exploit kits – malicious software that probes for vulnerabilities in browsers – on hijacked webpages and purpose designed, malware-laced websites. Zero-day vulnerabilities are frequently identified in web browsers, browser plugins, and extensions and these flaws can be exploited and leveraged to download malware and ransomware. Each time a new flaw is identified, it is rapidly added to a swathe of exploit kits.Anti-virus software is capable of detecting a high percentage of malware and preventing the malicious software from being installed on computers; however, new forms of malware are being released at an unprecedented rate. A new malware is now released every 4 seconds. Naturally, there is a lag between the release of new malware and the addition of its signature into antivirus software companies’ virus definition lists. Visits to malicious websites all too often result in malware installations that go undetected.Malicious websites are constantly being created. Google reports that since July 2013, 113,132 new phishing websites have been created and it is businesses that are being targeted. TitanHQ now adds over 60,000 new malware-spreading websites to its blocklists every single day.Companies that fail to block these web-borne threats face a high risk of their computers and networks being infected with malware. Figures from IDC show that 30% of companies employing more than 500 staff have experienced malware infections as a result of end users surfing the Internet.The range of threats is also increasing. Malware-infected websites are conducting Cross Site Request Forgery (CSRF) attacks, Cross-Component attacks, SQL injection attacks, as well exploiting vulnerabilities in popular Internet applications such as Adobe Flash, JSON, JavaScript, XPath and XML. Keeping all of these applications 100% up to date, 100% of the time is simply not possible for businesses, and any out-of-date-software could be exploited.Malware is used to log keystrokes to obtain login credentials for further, more sophisticated attacks. Banking credentials are stolen and fraudulent transfers are made. Businesses also have to contend with the current ransomware epidemic. 40% of businesses have now been attacked with ransomware.Malware and ransomware infections do not just occur via obscure websites that few employees visit. Hugely popular news sites such as the New York Times and the BBC have been discovered to display adverts containing malicious code. Social media websites are also a major risk. 24% of organizations have been infected with malware via Facebook and 7% via LinkedIn/Twitter, according to a recent study by Osterman Research.These and other serious threats, along with the extent to which infections are occurring, have been summarized in a new infographic that can be accessed by clicking on the image below:Fortunately, there is an easy solution to prevent web-borne attacks: WebTitan Cloud. WebTitan Cloud is a 100% cloud-based web filtering solution that can be used to prevent end users from visiting websites known to contain malware. WebTitan can be configured to block malicious adverts and can prevent end users from being directed to malware-infected websites if malicious links are clicked.Given the range of threats and the extent to which cybercriminals are using the web, it is now essential for organizations to add web filtering to their cybersecurity defenses. Consequently, web filtering for Managed Services Providers presents a huge opportunity for growth. TitanHQ has seen a significant increase in uptake of its web filtering for Managed Service Providers in recent months as MSPs have started to appreciate the huge potential web filtering for Managed Services Providers has to improve bottom lines.WebTitan can be rapidly added to an MSPs service stack and is an easy sell to clients. WebTitan can be deployed remotely and rapidly installed and configured. The solution is automatically updated, requires little to no IT support, is technology agnostic, and therefore so has an extremely low management overhead. The solution also has excellent scalability and can be used to protect any number of end users.MSPs can be provided with a white-label version of WebTitan Cloud ready for branding and WebTitan Cloud can even be hosted within an MSPs own environment. Perhaps most important for MSPs is the high margin recurring SaaS model. That means high recurring revenues for MSPs and better bottom lines.Contact TitanHQ today to find out more about web filtering for Managed Service Providers, for full technical specifications, and to discover just how easy it is to add WebTitan to your service stack and start boosting profits.Nov 23, 2016 | Cybersecurity Advice, Internet Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |Many employers are not entirely happy with employees using social media sites in the workplace, and with good reason: There are many risks of social media in business and the costs can be considerable.When employees are spending time updating their Facebook accounts or checking Twitter they are not working. All those minutes spent on social media platforms really do add up. Social media site use can be a major drain on productivity.If every employee in an organisation spends an hour a day on social media sites, the losses are considerable. Unfortunately, many employees spend much more than an hour a day on the sites.Salary.com reports that around 4% of employees waste more than half of each day on non-work related tasks. For a company employing 1,000 members of staff, that equates to more than 160 hours lost each day, not including the hour or two spent on social media sites by the remaining 96% of the workforce.Social media site use is not all bad, in fact, the use of the sites can be good for productivity. Employees cannot be expected to work solidly for 8 or more hours each day; at least not 8 highly productive hours. If employees enjoy some ‘Facetime’ every hour or two, it can help them to recharge so they are more productive when they return to their work duties.The problem for employers is how to control the use of Facebook in the workplace and ensure that social media site use is kept within acceptable limits. Taking 5 minutes off every hour or two is one thing. Taking longer can have a seriously negative impact. Unfortunately, relying on employees to self-moderate their use of social media sites may not be the best way to ensure that Internet use is not abused.Productivity losses can have a serious negative impact on profits, but there are far biggest costs to employers from social media site use. In fact, the risks of social media in business are considerable.The cost from lost productivity can be bad, but nowhere near as bad as the cost of a malware or ransomware infection. Social media sites are commonly used by hackers to infect computers. Just visiting a malicious Facebook or Twitter link can result in a malware or ransomware infection. The cost of resolving those infections can be astronomical. The more time employees spend on non-work related Internet activities, the greater the risk of a malware infection.Is there a genuine risk? According to PC Magazine, the risks are very real. There is a 40% chance of infection with malicious code within 10 minutes of going online and a 94% chance of encountering malicious code within an hour.Controlling employees’ use of the Internet can not only result in huge increases in productivity, Internet control can help to reduce the risk of malware and ransomware infections. Further, by limiting the sites that can be accessed by employees, organizations can greatly reduce legal liability.Fortunately, there is a simple, cost-effective, and reliable solution that allows organisations to effectively manage the risks of social media in business: WebTitan.WebTitan is an innovative web filtering solution that allows organizations to accurately enforce Internet usage policies. Employers can block inappropriate content to effectively reduce legal liability, block or limit the use of social media sites to improve productivity, and prevent users from encountering malicious code that could give cybercriminals a foothold in the network.If you have yet to implement a web filtering solution to control Internet use in the workplace or you are unhappy with the cost or performance of your current web filtering product, contact TitanHQ today and find out more about the difference WebTitan can make to your bottom line.To find out more about the risks of social media in business and why it is now so important to manage social media use in the workplace, click the image below to view our informative infographic.Oct 13, 2016 | Internet Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |Most employees are required to agree to use the Internet responsibly and are made to sign an acceptable usage policy as part of their induction before being supplied with a user ID. The policies vary in their content from organization to organization, but typically prohibit individuals from using the Internet to access illegal material, visit websites containing pornography, or engage in online activities that have no work purpose. The policies detail prohibited uses and state the penalties if individuals are discovered to have abused their access rights.For many businesses, this may be deemed to be sufficient. If policies are breached, there are serious repercussions for the individual. For most employees AUPs alone will be sufficient to stop Internet abuse. However, while a breach of AUPs could result in termination of a work contract or serious disciplinary action against an employee, the consequences for a business can be much more severe.AUPs can cover employers and prevent legal issues resulting from inappropriate Internet use, but they cannot protect against malware and ransomware infections. The consequences of malware and ransomware infections can be considerable. Data can be lost or corrupted by malware, to confidential information stolen, used for nefarious purposes, or sold on the darknet to criminals. The financial and reputational consequences for a business could be catastrophic.In the case of ransomware infections, the cost can be considerable. Earlier this year, Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center experienced a ransomware attack that required a ransom payment of $17,000 to be paid to recover data. The costs of dealing with the infection even after the ransom was paid was considerable, not to mention the disruption to operations while data were locked. Full access to data was not regained for more than a week.AUPs used to be sufficient to reduce risk – legal and otherwise – but today much more rigorous controls are required to keep networks secure. To manage the risk effectively, it is important to enforce acceptable usage policies with a technological solution.The most effective way of ensuring AUPs are adhered to is to enforce acceptable usage polices with a web filtering solution. A web filter can be configured to ensure the Internet can only be used for activities that an employer permits. Controls can be applied to ensure that illegal websites are not visited or to block pornography in the workplace, or stricter controls can be applied to severely restrict access. Most importantly given the massive rise in ransomware and malware attacks, controls can be enforced to keep networks secure.To find out more about the benefits of implementing a web filtering solution, how networks can be secured with WebTItan, and for details of pricing, contact the TitanHQ team today.Sep 19, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Web Filtering |Although many businesses use configured DNS filters to prevent cyberattacks, UK ISPs tend to blanket-block complete categories of websites to limit access to those most likely to be harboring malware. This hit-and-miss approach to online security often blocks genuine websites, or exposes consumers who opt out of DNS filtering to every type of online threat.However, plans have now been announced that will see the UK´s spy agency – GCHQ – partner up with leading ISPs in the UK in order to develop a more finely-tuned approach to consumer security. Effectively GCHQ will advise the ISPs on how to configure their DNS filters to prevent cyberattacks on consumers based on individual sites known to harbor malware.By preventing consumers from accessing “bad addresses” that appear to be legitimate domains, GCHQ hopes to reduce the number of malware and phishing attacks launched on the UK public each year. The organization is reported to routinely use DNS filtering to filter out some parts of the internet that the government asks to be banned, and this new initiative is an extension of its existing service.The plans were announced by Ciaran Martin – head of GCHQ and the recently formed National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) – at the Billington Cyber-Security Summit. Martin told Summit attendees, “We’re exploring a flagship project on scaling up DNS filtering: what better way of providing automated defenses at scale than by the major private providers effectively blocking their customers from coming into contact with known malware and bad addresses?”A few years ago, former UK Prime Minister David Cameron attempted to introduce legislation that would require ISPs to block pornography. While legislation was not passed, ISPs entered into a voluntary agreement to block pornography by default. Since 2013, all new customers have been prevented from accessing online pornography by their ISPs unless they choose to opt out and lift the DNS filter. Under this voluntary arrangement, UK citizens are protected from inappropriate content, yet their civil liberties are not violated.There would likely be considerable backlash if the government was to introduce legislation to block the accessing of certain websites, even if those sites were known to contain threats such as malware or ransomware. Martin is well aware of the potential problems that could arise. He told Summit attendees, “The government does not own or operate the Internet,” explaining that any move to use DNS filters to prevent cyberattacks would need to come from the private sector.Martin explained that, as with ISPs blocking pornography, consumers would be given a choice to opt out of using DNS filters to prevent cyberattacks. He said “addressing privacy concerns and citizen choice is hardwired into our program.”The plan to use DNS filters to prevent cyberattacks on consumers and UK businesses has been applauded. “The Great Firewall of Britain” will help to protect consumers from cybercriminal activity and keep electronic devices free from malware and ransomware.There are currently millions of malicious websites that have been set up with the sole purpose of spreading malware such as banking Trojans, ransomware, spyware, or to commit online fraud. Data from the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) shows the number of reported online security incidents has doubled in the past year and cyber-infection rates are growing at an exponential level around the globe.The use of DNS filters to prevent cyberattacks should go some way towards preventing consumers from inadvertently downloading malware or falling victim to a phishing campaign. However, while this is a step in the right direction, when the plan is implemented it will not spell an end to malware and ransomware attacks.ISP DNS filters can only block websites that are known to be malicious or have been discovered to host exploit kits or malware. Cybercriminals are constantly changing tactics and are using ever more sophisticated methods of attacking individuals, businesses, and governments. The use of ISP DNS filters to prevent cyberattacks will help to deal with low level attacks, but organizations should not rely on their ISPs to block online threats.It will still be essential for organizations to carefully control the website content that can be accessed by their employees, and to do that they will need their own web filtering solution.Jul 7, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Network Security |Kaspersky Lab has published a new ransomware study that clearly shows the rise in use of the malicious file encrypting software over the past two years. The research shows that companies are firmly in attackers’ sights, with attacks on companies having soared in recent months.For the ransomware study, Kaspersky Lab looked at crypto-ransomware, which uses encryption to lock critical business files as well as windows blockers – ransomware that simply locks victims’ computer screens to prevent files from being accessed. Kaspersky Lab took de-identified data from the Kaspersky Security Network (KSN) and assessed the data from individuals that had encountered ransomware between April 2014 and March 2016.Kaspersky Lab notes that while the prevalence of Windows blockers is still high, there has been a massive rise in the use of crypto-ransomware over the past 12 months. Between April 2015 and March 2016 there was a 17.7% rise in the number of individuals who encountered ransomware or Trojan downloaders that installed ransomware. During that time frame, 2,315,931 users had encountered ransomware.The figures show that cybercriminals are now increasingly turning to ransomware to make money, although in terms of the total number of malware encounters, ransomware remains relatively low. From April 2015 to March 2016, the proportion of users who encountered ransomware out of the total number who encountered other forms of malware increased from 3.63% to 4.34%, a rise of 0.7 percentage points.The Kaspersky ransomware study clearly shows the rise in popularity of crypto-ransomware with cybercriminals. Compared to 2014-2015, the last 12 months has seen the percentage of individuals who encountered crypto-ransomware rise by 25 percentage points. 31.6% of ransomware encounters are now with cryptors. Attacks using cryptors jumped by 5.5% to 718,536 attacks between 2015 and 2016.Kaspersky Lab also noted a fall in the use of Windows lockers. Attacks using Win-lockers fell by 13.03% over the same period, falling from 1,836,673 attacks in 2014-2015 to 1,597,395 attacks in 2015-2016.Windows blockers are not particularly sophisticated and are relatively easy to resolve; however, the same is not true of crypto-ransomware infections. An infection with a Windows-blocker can be reversed without paying a ransom demand. The victim could simply re-install their operating system. This may not be an ideal solution, and it can be time consuming, but the victim would be able to recover all of their files.With crypto-ransomware that is not the case. If a ransom demand is not paid, the victim would not be able to unlock their files. The decryption keys are all held by the attackers. The only way to recover from a crypto-ransomware attack without paying the ransom demand is by restoring files from a backup. If no backup exists, the victim must pay the ransom or forever lose their files. Because of this, victims are more likely to pay the ransom. It is therefore no surprise that cybercriminals are increasingly trying to cryptors.The Kaspersky Lab ransomware study shows that businesses are now increasingly being targeted. Not only will businesses be more likely to pay the ransoms, since ransoms are set per device, the infection of a business network of multiple computers would represent a big pay day for an attacker. Between 2014 and 2016, attacks on businesses rose from 6.80% of all attacks to 13.13%.The ransomware variants used to attack businesses and individuals has changed significantly over the past 12 months. In 2014-2015, CryptoWall accounted for the lion’s share of attacks (58.84%). Other attacks used a variety of different ransomware variants, the main other variants were Cryaki (5.66%) and Scatter (4.40%).In 2015-2016, the main ransomware variant was Teslacrypt, which accounted for 48.81% of ransomware attacks. However, many new variants were also extensively used. CTB-Locker accounted for 21.61% of attacks, Scatter 8.66%, Cryaki 7.13%, CryptoWall 5.21%, and Shade 2.91%. Attacks using Locky were just starting late in the year. Locky accounted for 0.62% of all attacks between 2015 and 2016. The “Others category” decreased considerably from 22.55% of attacks in 2014-2015, to 2.41% in 2015-2016. Kaspersky Lab attributes this to the sharing of crypto-ransomware kits by ransomware developers.Jun 22, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security |Healthcare ransomware infections have made the headlines in recent weeks, although the University of Calgary ransomware attack shows that no organization is immune: In fact, university ransomware attacks are on the rise.Organizations in the healthcare and financial sectors are the main targets for cybercriminals, although education is the third most likely industry to be attacked. Universities store huge volumes of highly sensitive data and state-sponsored hacking groups frequently conduct attacks.Foreign governments are keen to obtain research data and ransomware attacks on universities may just be a smokescreen. All too often DDoS attacks are performed for this purpose, yet ransomware can be just as effective. While IT departments scramble to secure systems and recover data, attackers may be plundering data.The University of Calgary ransomware attack occurred late last month and resulted in computer systems being severely disrupted. The IT department worked around the clock in an attempt to contain the infection and restore computer services one by one. While the University had made backups of critical data, the decision was taken to pay the attackers’ ransom demand as a precaution. To obtain the decryption keys the University had to pay the attackers $20,000.However, even after paying the ransom, unlocking the encryption and recovering data has been a long winded process. The decryption keys had to be assessed and evaluated, and the process of decrypting the infection took a considerable amount of time.If multiple computers are infected with ransomware, separate decryption keys are required for each device. Each computer must be restored separately and decryption keys do not always work and may not allow all data to be recovered.The keys have to be used with care and an infection can take up a considerable amount of an IT department’s time to resolve. Systems and data need to be checked after the infection has been removed and additional cybersecurity measures implemented to protect against future attacks.The University of Calgary ransomware attack has cost tens of thousands of dollars to resolve and shows that paying the attackers ransom demand is not a quick fix that will enable files to be quickly recovered. The recovery process is time consuming, expensive, and requires a considerable amount of resources.During the time that systems are down, workflows are seriously disrupted. In the case of university ransomware attacks lives may not be put at risk as is the case with healthcare attacks, but the costs of ransomware attacks on universities can be considerable. The total cost of resolving a ransomware infection is far in excess of any ransom payment.Unfortunately for universities, protecting against ransomware can be difficult as public and private networks often overlap. Staff and students are often allowed to connect personal devices to networks, and controlling devices that connect to networks can be a difficult task. While businesses can conduct cybersecurity training and can teach staff basic security best practices to adopt, this can be difficult for universities with huge volumes of staff, students and researchers.It is therefore important to implement a number of strategies to reduce the risk of a ransomware attack being successful.It is essential that regular data backups are made and backup devices must be air-gapped. Staff and students should be encouraged to save files on backed up network drives, and cybersecurity training should be provided where possible. Students should be informed of the risk and advised of security best practices via email and noticeboards.Many universities already use a web filtering solution to control the content that can be accessed via university wired and WiFi networks. Web filters can also be configured to reduce the risk of drive-by malware downloads. Anti-spam solutions can also prove effective as part of a multi-layered cybersecurity strategy and can prevent malicious emails from being delivered.Technology should also be implemented to identify intrusions when they occur. A network intrusion detection system is a wise precaution alongside traditional anti-virus and anti-malware solutions.It may not be possible to prevent all university ransomware attacks, but it is possible to manage risk and reduce the damage caused if ransomware is installed on devices or networks.Jun 16, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Network Security |This week saw a host of updates issued by Microsoft to address critical flaws in Windows, although 44 security vulnerabilities in total have been addressed in the updates. These vulnerabilities affect a wide range of its products including Windows, Internet Explorer, Edge, and many of its Microsoft Office products. The updates were spread across 16 security bulletins, 6 of which were rated by Microsoft as critical. The remaining patch bundles were marked as important.To address the latest critical flaws in Windows, all of the patches should be applied as soon as possible. However, some are more important than others and should be prioritized. MS16-071 is perhaps the most important, especially for organizations that run their DNS server on the same machine as their Active Directory server. This update addresses critical flaws in Windows Server 2012 and Windows Server 2012 R2.MS16-071 addresses a single flaw in Microsoft’s DNS server; however, the flaw is highly serious. Malicious actors could potentially exploit this vulnerability which allows remote code execution if an attacker send malicious requests to the DNS server. The update modifies how the DNS servers handle requests.Microsoft has also issued updates to address vulnerabilities in Internet Explorer – MS16-063 – and Microsoft Edge – MS16-068. These two flaws would allow an attacker to gain the same rights as the current user if that individual visits malicious websites configured to exploit the vulnerability.MS16-070 should also be updated as a priority. This security bulletin addresses a number of flaws, one of which could be exploited via spam email. It addresses vulnerability CVE-2016-0025, which concerns the Word RTF format. This could be exploited to yield RCE to the attacker. Worryingly, an attacker could exploit the flaw without an email even being opened, should that message be viewed using message preview in Microsoft Outlook.While all of these updates are important, there is an even bigger worry. A new zero-day vulnerability in Adobe Flash Player has been discovered by Kaspersky Lab researchers. Adobe has been alerted that an exploit already exists for CVE-2016-4171 and that it is being actively exploited in the wild. At present, the vulnerability is being exploited in targeted attacks on organizations by a new hacking group referred to by Kaspersky Lab as “ScarCruft.”Earlier this week, Adobe said it will delay the issuing of updates in order to address this new vulnerability. CVE-2016-4171 affects Adobe Flash v 21.0.0.242 and previous Windows, Mac, Chrome OS, and Linux versions. Updates are expected to start rolling out today.Jun 7, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Internet Security, Mobile Security, Network Security |The Zuckerberg Twitter hack has clearly demonstrated the danger of password reuse. Zuckerberg used the same password for Twitter as he did for his Pinterest and LinkedIn accounts. In spite of the Facebook founder, chairman, and CEO’s lofty position at the top of the world’s most popular social media network, he is guilty of poor data security practices like many others.In addition to reusing passwords, Zuckerberg also chose a password of 6 digits with no capital letters, symbols, or numbers and did not change it for at least three years. The password was revealed to be “dadada.”A collective known as OurMine was responsible for the Mark Zuckerberg Twitter hack. The collective, which is understood to hail from Saudi Arabia, gained access to data from the LinkedIn breach. The data were listed for sale a few days previously by a hacker operating under the name of “Peace”.The LinkedIn passwords were not stored as plaintext, so a little effort was required to reverse the hash to obtain the password. While SHA-1 was thought to be impossible to reverse, it has since been shown to be a relatively straightforward task unless the passwords are also salted. In the case of LinkedIn, they were not.Simply enter in the SHA-1 hash of a password into one of many reverse hash calculators and the plaintext password will be revealed. A search of the keyword phrase “how to reverse a sha1 password” will reveal many online options for doing so. Once the password had been obtained, access to online accounts was possible.The Zuckerberg Twitter hack did not appear to cause anything other than some embarrassment. The group notified Zuckerberg of the hack by tweeting him using his own account, saying “we are just testing your security.” While the tweet said that Zuckerberg’s Instagram account was compromised, it has since been confirmed that this account was secure all along, as was Zuckerberg’s Facebook account.While it is embarrassing, it should be pointed out that Zuckerberg was not a regular Twitter user, having only sent 19 tweets from his account in the past four years. His compromised Pinterest account was similarly rarely used.Other individuals were not quite so fortunate. Since the data from the LinkedIn breach was made available online, numerous celebrity social media accounts have been compromised. The Twitter accounts of celebrities such as Keith Richards and Kylie Jenner were hacked, as was the account of Tenacious D. The latter’s account was used to send a tweet saying Jack Black had died.While these hacks have not been confirmed as stemming from the LinkedIn breach (or the MySpace or Tumblr breaches) the spate of account hijacks suggest as much.TeamViewer GmbH was also a victim, having had numerous accounts compromised recently. The company provides remote desktop software and a number of users claim that the hacking of GmbH employee accounts enabled attackers to compromise their computers and authorize PayPal and Amazon transactions. This was attributed to “password mismanagement” by GmbH rather than any flaws in their software.All of these account hacks show how common the reuse of passwords is, and the danger of doing so. What should be particularly worrying for businesses, is many people use their LinkedIn passwords for work accounts, or vice versa. If that password is obtained via a data breach, malicious actors could do a considerable amount of damage.To improve security and reduce the risk of more than one account being compromised….Jun 3, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security, Network Security |A recent ransomware research study has shown the individuals running ransomware campaigns do not actually earn that much money and the success rate of attacks is relatively low. However, the threat from attacks cannot be ignored due to the volume of individuals now running their own ransomware campaigns.For the ransomware research study, web intelligence company Flashpoint trawled underground forums and marketplaces and monitored communications over a period of five months. The purpose of the ransomware research study was to improve understanding of how ransomware campaigns are run, to learn about the players involved, and the tactics they used to run campaigns and infect end users. It helps to know thy enemy when forming a defense strategy against attacks.For its ransomware research study, Flashpoint investigated Russian ransomware campaigns from December 2015. The attacks were predominantly carried out on organizations and individuals in the West.Considering the disruption caused and the money lost by victims of ransomware attacks, many people believe the criminals behind the campaigns are making big bucks, but that is not necessarily the case. In fact, even “ransomware bosses” – the individuals offering ransomware-as-a-service – are not raking in anywhere near as much money as many people think.The majority of cybercriminals who run ransomware campaigns earn well under $10,000 a month. According to the ransomware research study report, only one in five individuals who run ransomware campaigns admitted to earning in excess of this figure. The report suggests that the average monthly earnings from this type of campaign is around $600 per month.The typical ransom is around $300 per infected computer, although the people who run the campaigns have to give the ransomware bosses 60% of their earnings. They are allowed to keep the remaining 40%, suggesting most of the people running these campaigns only get 2-3 ransoms per month.The ransomware research study data suggest that far from allowing criminals to obtain big money from ransomware campaigns, the attacks only yield similar returns to other forms of cybercriminal activities. The only difference being the attackers can usually get their hands on money faster. Stealing data such as credit card numbers or healthcare data requires the attacker to find a buyer for those data before any money is received.The report suggests that the typical infection rate from a campaign is between 5% and 10%, yet few of the victims end up paying the ransom. Many ransomware victims are protected having made backup copies of important files and some are able to unlock the infections using tools from security companies. Others are willing to lose data rather than pay the ransom.Ransomware bosses that push ransomware-as-a-service using an affiliate model can make around $7,500 per month, which equates to around $90,000 a year – approximately 30 ransom payments per month for the bosses.While there are criminal gangs and highly skilled cybercriminals who invest a lot of time and effort into their ransomware attacks, the report suggests that the majority of attackers are novices; not skilled hackers. The report suggests that many individuals choose to run campaigns using ransomware-as-a-service in the hope that they will get lucky and get a big payout. These individuals tend to run spamming campaigns based on quantity rather than quality, and send high numbers of spam emails using botnets.Flashpoint’s ransomware research study shows just how easy it is to start sending out ransomware campaigns. This is why so many individuals choose to give it a try. All that is needed is a very small injection of capital to get started, a lack of morals about how money is earned online, and a modicum of knowledge to allow individuals to send out mass spam emails.Adverts for ransomware-as-a-service are easy to find with the Tor browser and advice on distribution is not difficult to find. Would-be criminals with no experience are recruited with a promise of a big payout, even though the reality is that for most people the payouts will be low.More experienced and skilled individuals send phishing emails directing victims to websites containing exploit kits, which probe for vulnerabilities and automatically download the ransomware. Another popular method of infection is to sneak adverts containing malicious links onto legitimate advertising networks.Only a small percentage of attackers are highly skilled. These individuals tend to send out targeted campaigns. These attackers target organizations and businesses with the aim of infecting multiple machines and infiltrating networks causing widespread disruption.These campaigns tend to involve a considerable amount of planning, and require the attacker to research targets and design targeted emails that have a high change of eliciting the desired response. According to Flashpoint’s director of Eastern European Research and Analysis, Andrei Barysevich, “The success rate of this type of operation is significantly higher, enabling criminals to earn upwards of $10,000 a month or more.”For organizations infected with ransomware the costs can be severe. Add up the cost of disruption to the business, the time and resources required to remove infections and restore files, and the cost of implementing more robust security measures, and the cost of a ransomware attack could be tens of thousands of dollars.With no shortage of takers for ransomware-as-a-service, and ever more sophisticated ransomware being developed, organizations must develop a host of defenses to prevent attacks from being successful.Jun 2, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security |Security researchers have discovered a serious Jetpack plugin vulnerability that places sites at risk of attack by hackers. If you run WordPress sites for your company and you use the Jetpack website optimization plugin, you must perform an update as soon as possible to prevent the flaw from being exploited.The Jetpack plugin vulnerability can be leveraged to inject malicious JavaScript code into websites, or to insert links, videos, documents, images, and other resources. This would place visitors to the site at risk of malware or ransomware downloads. Malicious actors could embed malicious JavaScript code in the site comments, and every time a visitor views a malicious comment it would allow JavaScript code to be run. Visitors could be redirected to other websites, the flaw could be used to steal authentication cookies and hijack administrator accounts, or to embed links to websites containing exploit kits.The flaw can also be exploited by competitors to negatively affect search engine rankings by using SEO spamming techniques, which could have serious consequences for site ranking and traffic.The Jetpack plugin vulnerability was recently discovered by researchers at Sucuri. The flaw is a stored cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerability that was first introduced in 2012, affecting version 2.0 of the plugin. All subsequent versions of Jetpack also contain the same Shortcode Embeds Jetpack module vulnerability.Jetpack is a popular WordPress plugin that was developed by the people behind WordPress.com – Automattic – and has been downloaded and used on more than one million websites. This is not only a problem for website owners, but for web visitors who could easily have this flaw exploited to infect their computers with ransomware or malware. Flaws such as this highlight the importance of using web filtering software that blocks redirects to malicious websites.While many WordPress plugin vulnerabilities require a substantial skill level to exploit, the jetpack plugin vulnerability takes very little skill at all to exploit. Fortunately, Jetpack has not discovered any active exploits in the wild; however, now the vulnerability has been announced, and details provided online about how to exploit the vulnerability, it is only a matter of time before hackers and malicious actors take advantage.The flaw can only be exploited if the Shortcode Embeds Jetpack module is enabled, although all users of the plugin are strongly advised to perform a site update as soon as possible. Jetpack has worked with WordPress to get the update pushed out via the WordPress core update system. If you have version 4.0.3 installed, you will already be protected.Jetpack reports that even if the flaw has already been exploited, updating to the latest version of the software will remove any exploits already on the website.Jun 1, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Internet Security |Over the past few days, rumors have been circulating about a massive MySpace data breach. Initial reports suggested that 427 million usernames and passwords had been obtained by a hacker going by the name of “Peace”. The name should sound familiar. The Russian hacker is the same individual who recently listed 117 million LinkedIn login credentials for sale on an illegal darknet marketplace. The hacker was also allegedly responsible for the 65 million-record data breach at Tumblr.Yesterday, Time Inc., confirmed that login credentials had been listed for sale online and that a MySpace data breach had occurred, although it would appear that the stolen data was obtained some time ago. The login credentials are for the old MySpace platform and date to before June 11, 2013. While Time Inc., did not confirm exactly how many login names and passwords had been stolen, Time confirmed that the figure of 360 million that had been reported in the press in the last couple of days was probably accurate.Usernames, passwords, email addresses, and secondary passwords are reportedly being offered for sale. Out of the 360 million logins, Leakedsourrce.com suggests that 111,341,258 of the stolen records include a username and a password, and 68,493,651 records had a secondary password compromised. Not all of those stolen records also included a primary password.Since 2013, data security has improved considerably and many companies have enforced the use of numerals, capital letters, and symbols when creating passwords. The stolen data reportedly includes only a small percentage of accounts with a capital letter in the password. This makes the passwords much easier to crack. The algorithm used to encrypt the passwords was also weak.The login credentials from the MySpace data breach are reportedly being offered for sale for 5 Bitcoin – approximately $2,800.All old users of the MySpace platform, and current users who joined the website before June 11, 2013 are potentially at risk. MySpace has responded to the breach by resetting all passwords on accounts created before June 11, 2013. When these users visit MySpace again they will be required to authenticate their account and supply a new password.Additional security measures have been employed to identify suspicious account activity and the data theft is now being investigated. It would appear that no one at MySpace was aware that its database had been breached until the data were offered for sale just before the Memorial Day weekend.Since the data breach appears to have occurred some time ago, it is probable that many users will have changed their passwords on the site long ago, but the data could still be used to attack past and current users. All too often passwords are recycled and used for other online accounts, and many individuals use the same passwords for different platforms or rarely (or never) change them.The MySpace data breach shows why it is important to use a different password for each online account and to regularly change passwords on all platforms. In the event of a breach of login credentials, users will only have to secure one account. If there is a possibility that only passwords are still in use on other platforms, MySpace account holders should update their passwords as soon as possible.Hackers have access to tools that can check to see if account login and password combos have been used on other websites.May 27, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Network Security, Web Filtering |After the recent news that TeslaCrypt has been decommissioned comes a new highly serious threat: DMA Locker ransomware.Malwarebytes has recently reported that DMA Locker ransomware, which is now in its 4th incarnation – could pose a significant threat to businesses and individuals over the coming weeks. Version 4 of the ransomware has already been added to the Neutrino exploit kit and is currently being distributed. Malwarebytes expects DMA Locker ransomware attacks to become much more widespread.DMA Locker ransomware was first seen in the wild in January of this year, yet the malicious file-encrypting malware posed little threat in its early forms, containing numerous flaws that allowed security companies to develop decryption tools.The early forms of DMA Locker ransomware were capable of encrypting files offline and did not used a command and control server. When files were encrypted, the key to unlock the encryption was stored on the device. This allowed the malware to be reverse engineered to crack the encryption.A new version of the ransomware was released a month later, yet it used a weak random generator and it was a relatively easy task to guess the AES key. A couple of weeks later saw the release of version 3, which saw previous flaws corrected by the authors.However, version 3 of DMA Locker ransomware contained another flaw. While it was not possible to decrypt locked files without a decryption key, the attackers used the same key for the entire campaign. If a business had multiple infections, only one key would need to be purchased. That key could then be posted online and be used by other victims.However, this month version 4 was released. The latest version corrects the issues with version 3 and uses a separate key for each infection. The ransomware also communicates with a command and control server and cannot work offline.Infection with early versions of the ransomware occurred via compromised remote desktop logins – or logins that were easily guessed. Consequently, the number of recorded infections remained low. However, the latest version has been added to exploit kits which take advantage of vulnerabilities in browsers making silent drive-by downloads of the ransomware possible. This makes attacks much more likely to occur.The ransomware is potentially highly serious, encrypting a wide range of file types. Many ransomware strains only encrypt specific file types. TeslaCrypt for example was developed to attack gamers, and encrypted saved game files and files associates with Steam accounts. DMA Locker does not search for specific files, and instead encrypts everything that is not in its whitelist of file extensions. It is also capable of encrypting files on network drives, not just the computer on which it has been downloaded.To prevent attacks, businesses should use web filtering software to block users visiting sites containing exploit kits and stop command and control server communications. Regular backups should also be performed and files stored on air-gapped drives. In case of attack, files can then be recovered without paying the ransom.May 26, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security |A successful CEO fraud scam that resulted in a fraudulent bank transfer being made from company accounts to a cyberattacker has cost the CEO his job.Earlier this year, FAAC – an Austrian aircraft component manufacturer –  was targeted by attackers who managed to pull off an audacious 50 million Euro ($55 million) CEO fraud scam. A wire transfer was made for 50 million euros by an employee of the firm after receiving an email request to transfer the funds from CEO Walter Stephan. The email was a scam and had not been sent by the CEO.Unfortunately for FAAC, the CEO fraud scam was discovered too late and the transfer of funds could not be stopped. While the company was able to recover a small percentage of its losses, according to a statement released by FAAC, the company lost 41.9 million Euros as a result of the attack which contributed to annual pretax losses of 23.4 million Euros.The bank transfer represented approximately 10% of the company’s entire annual revenue. Given the high value of the transfer it is surprising that the transfer request was not queried in person – or over the telephone with the CEO.The CEO and the employee who made the transfer were investigated but do not appear to have been involved in the scam. The attackers were not believed to be linked to FAAC in any way.Earlier this year, FAAC sacked its chief finance officer as a direct result of the scam. The CEO was recently sacked following a meeting of the company’s supervisory board. Stephan had worked at the company as CEO for 17 years.This CEO fraud scam is one of the largest ever reported, although this type of scam is becoming increasingly common. Earlier this year the FBI issued an advisory about the high risk of CEO fraud scams following many attacks on U.S companies over the past year. In April, the FBI reported that $2.3 billion has been lost as a result of this type of scam.CEO email fraud involves a member of the accounts department being sent an email from the CEO – or another senior executive – requesting a bank transfer be made from the company accounts. A reason is usually supplied as to why the transfer request needs to be made, and why it must be made urgently.Oftentimes, the scammer and the target exchange a few emails. An email is initially sent asking for a transfer to be made, followed by another email containing details of the recipient account where the funds must be sent and the amount of the transfer. The scams are effective because the request appears to come from within the company from a senior executive or CEO. Oftentimes the attackers manage to compromise the CEO’s email account, and spend time researching the style the CEO uses for emails and who transfer requests have been sent to in the past.According to the FBI, the average transfer amount is between $25,000 and $75,000, although much larger scams have been pulled off in the past. Irish budget airline Ryanair fell victim to a CEO fraud scam and wired $5 million to a Chinese bank, although the funds were able to be recovered. The Scoular Co., wired $17.2 million to scammers in February last year, while Ubiquiti suffered a loss of $46.7 million as a result of a CEO fraud scam.There are steps that can be taken that can greatly reduce the risk of these scams being successful.May 26, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security, Network Security |Resolving a hospital ransomware infection may not be as easy as paying the attackers’ ransom demand, as was shown by the Kansas Heart Hospital ransomware attack last week.The Kansas Heart Hospital ransomware attack which occurred last week was the latest in a string of attacks on healthcare organizations in the United States. Ransomware was accidentally installed on a hospital worker’s computer and files were locked and prevented from being accessed.A ransom demand was received demanding payment for decryption keys to unlock the infection. The decision was taken to pay the ransom to resolve the hospital ransomware infection quickly.After the ransom was paid, the attackers did not make good on their promise and failed to unlock all of the files. Some Instead the hospital was issued with a second ransom demand.In this case, the initial ransom demand was relatively low. Ransomware attackers typically demand a fee of approximately $500 per device to unlock an infection. If multiple computers have been infected, that figure is then multiplied by the number of devices that need to be decrypted.Ransomware locks each individual machine separately, and a different key is required to unlock each one. Otherwise a victim could pay up and then publish their key and no one else would be required to pay.Kansas Heart Hospital did not disclose how much was paid, but this could well have been the fee to unlock a single machine. However regardless of the amount, the incident shows that even if a ransom is paid there is no guarantee that the attackers will play ball and make good on their promise. Further demands may be made from more Bitcoin. Resolving a hospital ransomware infection may not necessarily mean just paying the ransom demand.Over the past few months the healthcare industry has come under attack from criminals using ransomware. Some authors of ransomware have taken steps to prevent healthcare providers’ computers from being attacked by their ransomware by including checks to determine the environment in which the ransomware has been installed. However, not all attackers feel they have a moral responsibility to prevent attacks which could cause people to come to physical harm.Hollywood Presbyterian medical center, Alvarado Hospital Medical Center, King’s Daughters’ Health, Kentucky’s Methodist Hospital, California’s Chino Valley Medical Center and Desert Valley Hospital, and MedStar Health have all been attacked with ransomware this year.That list is likely to continue to grow. Hospitals and medical centers are attractive targets for ransomware gangs. Many healthcare organizations have under-invested in cybersecurity measures to protect their networks and many hospital employees have not received extensive training in security awareness. This makes it easy for attackers to install ransomware.Furthermore, if patient data are locked this can have a negative effect on patient health. If patients are at risk of harm, organizations are much more likely to respond to ransom demands and pay up to ensure patients do not suffer. If patients are harmed as a direct result of poor investment in cybersecurity or mistakes that have been made by healthcare employees, healthcare organizations are likely to face lawsuits that could result in damages far in excess of the ransom being demanded.With attacks likely to continue, healthcare providers must take steps to prevent ransomware attacks from occurring, and develop policies that can be implemented immediately upon discovery of a ransomware attack. As the Kansas Heart hospital ransomware attack has shown, paying a ransom is no guarantee that the file encryption will be unlocked. Hospitals may find that they still have to recover files from backups or explore other means of unlocking infections.May 24, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Network Security, Web Filtering |The threat from Cerber ransomware has increased substantially after the gang behind the file-encrypting software have leveraged Dridex botnets to deliver a malicious payload that loads the ransomware onto users’ devices.Cerber ransomware was first discovered in the wild in February 2016, but researchers at security firm FireEye noticed a massive increase in infections in recent weeks. Initially, Cerber ransomware infections occurred as a result of visiting malicious websites hosting the Nuclear or Magnitude exploit kits. Nuclear and Magnitude probe visitors’ browsers for a number of zero day vulnerabilities, although infections primarily occurred by exploiting a vulnerability in Adobe Flash (CVE-2016-1019). Now the ransomware is being installed via infected files sent via spam email.Cerber differs from many ransomware strains by being able to speak to victims. The ransomware is able to use text-to-speech to tell victims they have been infected and that their files have been encrypted.The number of infections remained relatively low since the discovery of the new ransomware earlier this year; however, there was a massive spike in infections around April 28 according to FireEye. The ransomware was being downloaded using Microsoft Word macro downloaders.The attached files are usually disguised as invoices, receipts, or purchase orders, while the emails – written in English – urge the user to open the attachment. If macros are enabled on the computer a VBScript will be installed in the victim’s %appdata% folder. If macros are not enabled users will be prompted to enable them in order to view the contents of the file. Doing so will guarantee infection.Once installed, the script performs a check to determine whether the infected computer has an Internet connection by sending an HTTP request to a website. If an Internet connection is present, the script will perform a HTTP Range Request, that will ultimately result in the final stage of the infection. FireEye reports the technique has previously been used to deliver the financial Trojans Dridex and Ursnif.Cerber has been configured to encrypt Word documents, emails, and Steam gaming files, which are given a “.cerber” extension. To unlock the encryption, the victims are told to visit one of a number of websites with the domain “decrypttozxybarc”. Further instructions are then provided on how to unlock the encryption, although a Bitcoin ransom must first be paid. In addition to encrypting files, Cerber ransomware adds the victim’s computer to a spambot network.The ransomware uses a number of obfuscation techniques to avoid detection by spam filters and anti-virus programs. If the emails are delivered and the macros are allowed to run, victims’ files will be encrypted. To prevent infection, it is important to have macros disabled and to be extremely cautious about opening email attachments, and never to open files deliver via email from an unknown sender. The decrypttozxybarc domain should also be added to web filter blacklists.May 21, 2016 | Cybersecurity Advice, Internet Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |There are a number of companies that offer web filtering services for MSPs; however, while many managed service providers are happy to provide web filtering to their clients if the service is requested, web filtering is not generally offered to clients as part of an MSP’s range of standard Internet services. Yet, by leveraging web filtering services for MSPs it is possible to substantially increase profits for very little effort.Web filtering services for MSPs have been developed to be easy to implement, easy to sell to clients, and straightforward to manage, so why are more MSPs not offering web filtering to their clients as part of their Internet services?Some MSPs may feel that there is not much of a market for web filtering. Draconian Internet usage policies may ensure that Internet access is not abused, yet highly restrictive Internet policies can have a negative impact on staff morale and productivity. Most employees can be trusted to get all of their daily tasks completed, while still occasionally checking Facebook, purchasing something on Amazon, and viewing the occasional YouTube video.However, providing totally free access to the Internet is unwise. Not preventing employees from accessing illegal and inappropriate website content can cause employers many problems. Some of those problems can prove very costly to resolve.  Any organization that has not chosen to filter the Internet – even to a minimal degree – may not be aware of the risks. If MSPs explain these risks, they are likely to find many of their clients will want to sign up for web filtering services.There are two main reasons for using a web filter to control Internet content:As we have seen in recent months, there is a clear and present danger of a serious malware infection. Cyberattacks are taking place with increasing regularity, new malware is being released at alarming rates, and cybercriminals have embraced ransomware and are using it to extort money out of businesses.IT teams struggle to implement patches promptly, leaving their networks at risk of attack. This is mainly due to the frequency at which patches are released. Keeping all software – including web browsers and plugins – 100% up to date, 100% of the time is an uphill struggle.If end users visit malicious websites containing exploit kits, malware and ransomware can be easily loaded onto networks. Issuing staff members with acceptable use policies (AUPs) can reduce the probability of end users visiting high-risk websites, while policies can help to reduce the risk from shadow IT installations, but unless those policies are enforced there is a risk that some employees will break the rules.Numerous organizations have experienced phishing attacks even when training has been provided on how to identify phishing emails. Unfortunately, scammers are getting much better at crafting highly convincing emails to fool users into visiting websites containing exploit kits that can download malware.Business email compromise scams have been increasing in recent months, prompting the FBI to issue warnings due to the high risk of attack. Scammers are impersonating CEOs, CISOs, and executives to get end users to visit websites and divulge their login credentials or download malware.With so many Internet threats to deal with, policies are no longer enough to keep organizations’ networks free from malicious software and infections can prove very costly to resolve.Many companies take a relaxed attitude to personal Internet use, provided it is kept within certain limits. This is arguably the best option for employers and employees. Blocking personal access to the Internet can have a negative effect on staff morale, and all employees will need to use the Internet from time to time for personal reasons.That said, there will always be some members of staff that choose to abuse their Internet access and this can lead to serious problems for employers. Not only is there a risk of malware infections, abuse of the Internet can have legal implications for employers. The use of illegal file sharing websites for copyright-infringing downloads, the accessing of illegal website content such as child pornography, or even the viewing of legal pornography in the workplace can cause many HR issues.Of course, web filtering is not only about blocking access. It allows companies to monitor use of the Internet and identify employees who are breaking the rules before serious HR or legal issues arise. Web filtering also allows organizations to place limits on online activities at certain times of the day to ensure the workforce remains productive and bandwidth is not wasted.Web filtering services for MSPs no longer require expensive appliances to be purchased, and it is not necessary to use local IT support teams to visit clients to install and configure web filters. In fact, it is not even necessary to install software on clients’ devices or servers at all. Clients can have their Internet filtered within 5 minutes of them saying yes to a sales representative if cloud-based web filtering services are used.Cloud-based web filtering services for MSPs require clients to make a small change to their DNS settings, something that even the most technically inept employee could be talked through over the phone. By pointing the DNS to the service provider’s servers, the Internet can be filtered quickly and painlessly.Web filtering services for MSPs can be easily offered to clients alongside managed service providers’ solutions. WebTitan Cloud – and WebTitan Cloud for WiFi – are offered as web filtering services for MSPs without any branding. MSPS are able to add their own logos and corporate color schemes, tailor block pages, and customize reports with their own branding. If required, MSPs can also host the solution within their own infrastructure or use a private cloud for clients.The management overhead is low and the configuration of new accounts is quick and easy. New client accounts can be set up in approximately 20 minutes. Even reporting is taken care of with a full suite of pre-configured, schedulable reports, including instant email alerts.The cost for the client is low with only a small spend required per user, per year, and the margins offered by TitanHQ on web filtering services for MSPs are generous. This allows MSPs to easily increase profits, in some cases, by tens of thousands of dollars.If you want to attract new business, increase client spending, and easily increase profits, web filtering services for MSPs could well be the answer.For further information on our web filtering services for MSPs, including a product demonstration and details of pricing, contact our sales team today.May 18, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Internet Security |The 2012 LinkedIn data breach was believed to have resulted in the theft of 6.5 million emails and encrypted passwords; however, the data breach appears to be worse than previously thought with considerably more data stolen. Those data have now been listed for sale on a darknet marketplace, prompting LinkedIn to contact a substantial percentage of its users to get them to change their passwords.A hacker called “Peace” listed 117 million LinkedIn email and encrypted password combinations for sale this week. LinkedIn believes the data has also come from the 2012 LinkedIn data breach. The data were in the same format as the 6.5 million passwords and email combinations that were previously listed for sale. The latest batch of data has been listed or sale for a reported $2,200.The passwords stolen in the 2012 LinkedIn data breach were unsalted SHA-1 hashes. While the passwords are encrypted, they are poorly protected and can easily be cracked with relative ease.Soon after the 2012 LinkedIn data breach the 6.5 million account details were offered for sale on a Russian hacking forum. Motherboard reports that as many as 90% of those passwords were able to be cracked. This now places 18 times as many users at risk of having their accounts compromised.LinkedIn users that joined the professional networking website after the 2012 data breach will not be affected by the data sale, although older users of the site could be at risk, especially if the password they used for their LinkedIn account has been used other logins elsewhere online.Individuals who tend to use the same passwords on multiple websites or those who recycle old passwords are advised to change their passwords on their banking websites, social media profiles, email accounts, and other online sites if there is a possibility that they have used the same password as they used on LinkedIn prior to the 2012 breach.The 2012 LinkedIn data breach was possible because security at the time was not particularly robust, although that has since been addressed. LinkedIn now salts its hashes, uses two factor authentication, and also email challenges. Since being alerted to the listing of the password/username combos, LinkedIn has been contacting affected users and attempting to invalidate passwords and force users to reset.It is strongly advisable to login to LinkedIn and change your password as a precaution if you are unsure whether you have changed your password since 2012.May 13, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Internet Security, Mobile Security, Network Security |Each year, the Ponemon Institute conducts a benchmark survey on healthcare data privacy and security. The surveys give a picture of the state of healthcare data security, highlight the main threats faced by the healthcare industry, and offer an insight into the main causes of healthcare data breaches. This week, the Ponemon Institute released the results of its 6th annual benchmark study on healthcare data privacy and security.Over the past 6 years, the main causes of healthcare data breaches have changed considerably. Back in 2010/2011 when the two healthcare data privacy and security surveys were conducted, the main causes of healthcare data breaches were lost and stolen devices, third party errors, and errors made by employees.Breaches caused by the loss and theft of unencrypted devices such as laptops, smartphones, tablets, and portable storage devices such as zip drives has fallen considerably in recent years. Due to the high risk of loss and theft – and the cost of risk mitigation following a data breach and compliance fines – healthcare organizations are keeping tighter controls on portable devices. Staff have been trained to be more security conscious and many healthcare organizations have chosen to use data encryption on portable devices. However, lost/stolen devices and mistakes by employees and third parties are still the root cause of 50% of healthcare data breaches.Data breaches caused by the loss and theft of portable devices may be in decline, but the same cannot be said of cyberattacks, which have increased considerably. When the first benchmarking study was conducted in 2010, 20% of data breaches were caused by hackers and other cybercriminals. By 2015, the figure had risen to 45%. This year criminals have been responsible for 50% of healthcare data breaches.Healthcare data breaches have increased in volume, frequency, and severity. Prior to 2015, the largest healthcare data breach exposed 4.7 million patient health records. Data breaches that exposed more than 1 million healthcare records were very rare. However, in 2015, the Anthem Inc. breach exposed 78.8 million healthcare records, Premera BlueCross recorded a cyberattack that exposed 11 million records, and Excellus Blue Cross Blue Shield reported a breach of 10 million records. These data breaches were caused by criminals who gained access to systems using phishing techniques.Phishing remains a major cause for concern, as is malware, although over the course of the past 12 months a new threat has emerged. Ransomware is now the second biggest cause for concern for healthcare security professionals. DDoS attacks remain the biggest worry as far as cyberattacks are concerned.The purpose of ransomware and DDoS attacks is to cause widespread disruption. Healthcare IT professionals are right to be concerned. Both of these types of cyberattack have potential to have a hugely detrimental effect on the care that is provided to patients, potentially disrupting healthcare operations to such a degree that patients can actually come to physical harm.Healthcare organizations have been investing more heavily in data security technologies to prevent breaches, yet these measures have not been sufficient to stop breaches from occurring. The report indicates that 89% of healthcare organizations suffered a data breach in the past two years, 79% suffered more than one breach, and 45% experienced more than five data breaches.The cost of healthcare data breaches is considerable. The Ponemon Institute calculates the average cost to resolve a data breach to be $2.2 million for healthcare providers. The average cost of a business associate data breach is $1 million. The total cost each year, to mitigate risk and resolve data breaches, has been estimated by Ponemon to be $6.2 billion for the industry as a whole.Cybersecurity budgets may have increased over the years, but too little is being spent on healthcare data privacy and security data. Even with the increased risk, 10% of healthcare organizations have actually decreased their cybersecurity budgets, and more than half (52%) said their budgets have stayed the same this year.Further investment is needed to tackle the growing threat and to prevent criminals from gaining access to data and locking it with ransomware.Education also needs to be improved and greater care taken by healthcare employees to prevent accidental disclosures of data and mistakes that open the door to cybercriminals. Employee negligence was rated as the top cause for concern by both healthcare providers and business associates of healthcare organizations. Unless greater care is taken to prevent data breaches and healthcare organizations are held more accountable, the data breach totals will only rise.May 5, 2016 | Cybersecurity Advice, Cybersecurity News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |Finding new revenue avenues for MSPs can be difficult. There are many ways for MSPs to increase client spending and win new business, although new revenue avenues for MSPs that are easy to implement and manage, are straightforward to sell to clients, and also offer good margins are few and far between. Fortunately, there is a product that can easily be incorporated into existing client offerings which is highly desirable, has a low management overhead, and offers MSPs excellent margins. That service is WebTitan Cloud. WebTitan Cloud is a web filtering service that has been developed with MSPs in mind.The benefits of WebTitan Cloud are considerable. Our web filtering solution can be used to protect virtually all organizations from a wide range of Internet threats: Something that is increasingly important given the increase in phishing attacks and the proliferation of malware and ransomware in recent years. The cost of resolving malware infections is considerable, and data theft and loss can have catastrophic consequences for SMBs. Heavy fines can be issued by regulators for data breaches, and reputation damage from customer data theft can be considerable.Employees need to be provided with Internet access to work efficiently; however, Internet access is often abused. Employees are wasting a considerable amount of time each day on personal Internet use. Social media networks are accessed, gambling sites used at work, and gaming sites used by many employees during working hours. By limiting access to these websites organizations can greatly increase the productivity of the workforce. Filtering the Internet to prevent employees and customers from accessing inappropriate website content can also prevent HR issues from developing and can reduce legal risk.Our web filtering solution can also be used to manage bandwidth. Most organizations face bandwidth issues at some point, yet with careful configuration of our web filter, bandwidth can be effectively managed. Bandwidth-heavy Internet services can be limited to ensure that fast Internet access can be enjoyed by all.WebTitan Gateway is a powerful web filtering product that can keep networks protected from web-borne threats and can be used to control the content that can be accessed by employees and customers. While WebTitan Gateway can be offered by MSPs to their clients, TitanHQ has developed a new product that has been tailored to the specific needs of managed service providers.WebTitan Cloud is a 100% cloud-based web filtering solution that requires no software installations and no hardware purchases. Our web filtering service can be applied in a matter of minutes without the use for on-the-ground IT support teams. Being DNS-based, all that is required is a small change to DNS settings. Point the DNS to our servers and website content can be filtered in as little as 2 minutes.Configuring new clients’ web filtering settings is a quick and easy process. It takes approximately 20 minutes to add a new client and upload their Internet policy settings. Furthermore, configuring client accounts is a straightforward admin task requiring no technical skill. If clients want to manage their own settings, they can be provided with their own login and administrative roles can be easily delegated. With WebTitan Cloud, filtering the Internet could not be any simpler.There are many companies now offering a web filtering service that can be used by MSPs, but few offer a product or service that has been created with MSPs in mind. With many solutions the cost of implementation is high, margins for MSPs are low, implementation is impractical, and management causes major headaches. On top of that, the lack of white label options means clients could easily end up going direct and cutting an MSP out of the equation. WebTitan Cloud is different.WebTitan Cloud is offered as a white label, allowing MSPs to easily incorporate a web filtering service into their existing product offerings. MSPs are able to add their own logos, configure block screens, and change color schemes to match their own corporate branding. A range of APIs are also included to make integration with back-office systems as easy as possible. We even offer multiple hosting options. WebTitan Cloud can be run on our servers, in a private cloud, or even within an MSP’s infrastructure.With WebTitan Cloud, MSPs can start providing a much more comprehensive Internet service to clients and easily boost their profits. For further information on WebTitan Cloud, how our service can be incorporated into your existing portfolios, and for details of pricing, contact our sales team today.Apr 30, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Network Security, Web Filtering |The recent rise in ransomware infections has been attributed to the proliferation of ransomware-as-a-service, with many malicious actors now getting in on the act and sending out spam email campaigns to unsuspecting users.The problem with ransomware-as-a-service is how easy it is for attackers with relatively little technical skill to pull off successful ransomware attacks. All that is needed is the ability to send spam emails and a small investment of capital to rent the ransomware. The malicious software is now being openly sold as a service on underground forums and offered to spammers under a standard affiliate model.The malware author charges a nominal fee to rent out the ransomware, but takes a large payment on the back end. Providers of ransomware-as-a-service typically take a cut of 5%-25% of each ransom. Spammers get to keep the rest. Renters of the malicious software cannot access the source code, but they can set their own parameters such as the payment amount and timescale for paying up.While individuals were targeted heavily in the past and sent ransom demands of around $400 to $500 to unlock their family photographs and other important files, attackers and now extensively targeting businesses. Often the same model is used with a fee charged by the attackers per install.When an organization has multiple devices infected with ransomware the cost of remediation is considerable. One only needs to look to Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center to see how expensive these attacks can be. The medical center was forced to pay a ransom of $17,000 to unlock computers infected with ransomware, in addition to many man-hours resoling the infection once the encryption keys had been supplied. Not to mention the cost of reputation damage and clearing the backlog due to the shutting down of its computers for over a week.As if the threat from ransomware was not enough, researchers believe the situation is about to get a whole lot worse. Ransomware-as-a-service could be used by a malicious insider to infect their own organization. With insider knowledge of the locations and types of data critical to the running of the business, an insider would be in the best position to infect computers.Insiders may also be aware of the value of the data and the cost to the business of losing data access. Ransoms could then be set accordingly. With payments of tens of thousands of dollars possible, this may be enough to convince some employees to conduct insider attacks. Since finding hackers offering ransomware-as-a-service is not difficult, and network access has already been gained, insiders may be tempted to pull off attacks.To counter the risk of insider ransomware attacks businesses should develop policies to make it crystal clear to employees that attackers will be punished to the full extent of the law. Software solutions should be put in place to continuously monitor for foreign programs installed on networks and network privileges should be restricted as far as is possible. Employees should have their network activities monitored and suspicious activity should be flagged and investigated. It is not possible to eliminate the risk of insider attacks, but it is possible to reduce risk to a minimal level.Apr 29, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Network Security |IT professionals are well aware of the shadow IT risk. Considerable risk is introduced by employees installing unauthorized software onto their work computers and mobile devices. However, this has been clearly illustrated this week following the discovery of a new malware by the Talos team. To date more than 12 million individuals are believed to have installed the new Trojan downloader.Many users are frustrated by the speed of their PC and download tools that will help to resolve the problem, yet many of these are simply bloatware that perform no beneficial functions other than slowing down computers. These can be used to convince users to pay for additional software that speeds up their PCs, or worse. The software may perform various nefarious activities.It would appear that the new malware is of this ilk. Furthermore, it is capable of being exploited to perform a wide range of malicious actions. The software performs a wide range of highly suspect functions and has potential to steal information, gain administration rights, and download malicious software without the user’s knowledge.The new malware has been referred to as a “generic Trojan” which can check to see what AV software is installed, detect whether it has been installed in a sandbox, determine whether remote desktop software has been installed, and check for security tools and forensic software.By detecting its environment, the malware is able to determine whether detection is likely and if so the malware will not run. If detection is unlikely a range of functions are performed including installing a backdoor. The backdoor could be used to install any number of different programs onto the host machine without the user’s knowledge.So far more than 7,000 unique samples have been discovered by Talos. One common theme is the use of the word “Wizz” throughout the code, with the malware communicating with “WizzLabs.Analysis of the malware revealed that one of the purposes of the software was to install adware called “OneSoftPerDay”. The company behind this adware is Tuto4PC, a French company that has got into trouble with authorities before for installing PUPs on users’ computers without their knowledge.By allowing the malware to run, researchers discovered it installed System Healer – another Tito4PC creation – without any user authorization. Whether the malware will be used for nefarious activity other than trying to convince the users to download and pay for PUPs is unclear, but the potential certainly exists. With 12 million devices containing this software, at any point these machines could be hijacked and the software used for malicious purposes.The shadow IT risk should not be underestimated by security professionals. Many seemingly legitimate software applications have the capability of performing malicious activities, and any program that does to such lengths to detect the environment in which it is run and avoid detection is a serious concern.Organizations should take steps to reduce Shadow IT risk and prevent installation of unauthorized software on computers. Policies should be put in place to prohibit the installation of unauthorized software, and software solution should be employed to block installers from being downloaded. As an additional precaution, regular scans should be conducted on networked devices to check for shadow IT installations and actions taken against individuals who break the rules.Apr 28, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |Anti-phishing strategies can be employed to protect networks from attack; however, a new report from Verizon shows that phishing is proving more successful than ever. Anti-phishing strategies are being employed, but they are not sufficient to prevent attacks from taking place. End users are still opening phishing emails and divulging their login credentials to attackers.According to the new report a greater percentage of employees are now falling for phishing scams. Last year’s Verizon Data Breach Report showed that 23% of phishing emails were being opened. This year the number has risen to 30%.Opening a phishing email does not result in a network being compromised or the attacker gaining access to email accounts. For that to happen, an end user must open an infected email attachment or click on a link to a malicious website.How often are employees taking this extra step? According to the Verizon data breach report, 12% of end users open the phishing email and double click on an attached file.A similar percentage (13%) of end users click on the malicious links contained in the emails. These links either direct the user to a website containing an exploit kit or to a site where login credentials or other sensitive data are entered and revealed to attackers.Anti-phishing methods are being taught to company employees, but attacks are still succeeding with alarming frequency. Phishing is proving to be a highly effective method of cyberattack.The report also indicates that when attacks are successful attackers have plenty of time to exfiltrate data. Organizations are also finding it much harder to detect breaches when they occur. Attacks are taking minutes from the sending of a phishing email to network access being gained, yet it can take months for breaches to be detected.Anti-phishing strategies adopted by many organizations are not robust enough to prevent successful attacks. Anti-phishing strategies that rely too heavily on training staff members how to identify phishing emails are likely to fail.It only takes one employee to respond to a phishing email for a network to be compromised and it is a big ask to expect every employee to identify every phishing email, 100% of the time.Providing staff members with anti-phishing training can help to reduce risk, although software solutions should also be employed. A robust spam filtering solution should be implemented to ensure the majority of phishing emails are blocked and never delivered to end users’ inboxes. No anti-spam solution is effective 100% of the time, although blocking 99.9% of phishing emails is possible with solutions such as SpamTitan.Attackers are using ever more sophisticated methods to fool end users into clicking on malicious links. A great deal of time and effort goes into spoofing domains and producing carbon-copy spoof websites. Preventing these websites from being visited is one of the best defenses against phishing attacks. Web filtering solutions can be highly effective way of reducing the risk of a phishing attack being successful.A web filter can be configured to block phishing websites and other potentially harmful websites. Even if links are clicked, the user is prevented from compromising their device and network.Apr 23, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Industry News, Internet Security, Mobile Security, Network Security |A new study has confirmed that the healthcare industry faces the highest risk of cyberattacks. Healthcare providers and health plans are being targeted by cybercriminals due to the value of patient data on the black market. A full set of medical records, along with personally identifiable information and Social Security numbers, sells for big bucks on darknet marketplaces. Health data is far more valuable then credit cards for instance.Furthermore, organizations in the healthcare industry store vast quantities of data and cybersecurity protections are still less robust than in other industry verticals.The survey was conducted by 451 Research on behalf of Vormetric. Respondents were asked about the defenses they had put in place to keep sensitive data secure, how they rated their defenses, and how they planned to improve protections and reduce the risk of cyberattacks occurring.78% of respondents rated their network defenses as very or extremely effective, with network defenses having been prioritized by the majority of healthcare organizations. 72% rated data-at-rest defenses as extremely or very effective. While this figure seems high, confidence in data-at-rest defenses ranked second from bottom. Only government industries ranked lower, with 68% of respondents from government agencies rating their data-at-rest defenses as very or extremely effective.Even though many IT security professionals in the healthcare industry believe their network and data-at-rest defenses to be robust, 63% of healthcare organizations reported having experienced a data breach in the past.Many organizations have been prioritizing compliance with industry regulations rather than bolstering defenses to prevent data breaches. Many healthcare organizations see compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) as being an effective way of ensuring data are protected.HIPAA requires all covered-entities – healthcare providers, health plans, healthcare clearinghouses, and business associates of covered entities – to implement administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to keep confidential patient data secure. By achieving “HIPAA-compliance” covered entities will improve their security posture and reduce the risk of cyberattacks, but compliance alone will not ensure that data are protected.One only needs to look at the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office for Civil Rights breach portal to see that healthcare data breaches are commonplace. Many of the organizations listed in the breach portal have implemented defenses to protect data and are HIPAA-compliant. Compliance has not prevented data breaches from occurring.The 451 Research survey asked respondents their views on compliance. 68% said it was very or extremely effective at ensuring data were secured. The reality is HIPAA only requires healthcare organizations to implement safeguards to achieve a minimum level of data security. In order to prevent data breaches and effectively manage the risk of cyberattacks, organizations need to invest more heavily in data security.HIPAA does not, for example, require organizations to protect data-at-rest with encryption. If the network perimeter is breached, there is often little to prevent data from being stolen. Healthcare organizations are focusing on improving network protection but should not forget to protect data-at-rest with encryption. 49% said network security was still the main spending priority over the next 12 months, which was the highest rated security category for investment.Healthcare organizations did appreciate that investment in technologies to protect data-at-rest was important, with 46% of respondents saying spending would be increased over the next 12 months on technologies such as disk and file encryption to help manage the risk of cyberattacks.Apr 7, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |Law firm data security has come under the spotlight in the past couple of weeks following the publication of a number of news reports on hacking incidents at law firms, and most recently, the huge 11.5 million-document 2.6 terabyte data leak at Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca. The latest data leak exposed the offshore banking activities of some of the world’s wealthiest individuals, including 70 current and former world leaders.Cybercriminals are targeting law firms in an attempt to gain access to data on mergers and acquisitions, email accounts are being hacked to obtain details of bank transfers to reroute funds to hackers’ accounts, and attacks are being conducted to gain access to client data on patents and new products. Corporate data is also being stolen and sold on the darknet.The banks are putting increasing pressure on law firms to do more to protect their networks from attack, while law enforcement authorities are attempting to get law firms to disclose data breaches when they occur. With law firms now under greater scrutiny, clients are likely to demand assurances that modern – not modest – cybersecurity defenses are put in place to protect their confidential data. However, many reports suggest law firm data security is substandard and incapable of preventing cyberattacks.Cyberattacks on small law firms that have invested relatively little in cybersecurity defenses are perhaps to be expected; however, the computer networks of some of the biggest law firms in the United States have been compromised. Those include high profile firms such as Cravath Swaine & Moore and Weil Gotshal & Manges.A report in Crain’s Chicago Business indicated 48 of the most prestigious law firms in the United states had been targeted by a Russian hacker operating out of Ukraine. That individual was targeting law firms with a view to trading stolen M&A data. A number of UK law firms have been attacked by hackers who have gained access to email accounts and hijacked bank transfers, netting over $97 million in the past 18 months.Many law firms do not disclose data breaches so the true extent to which cyberattacks are occurring is difficult to estimate but, based on recent reports, data breaches are far more prevalent than previously thought. The reports suggest that law firm data security measures need to be improved in light of increased efforts by cybercriminals to break through law firms’ defenses.A report from Citigroup last month suggested digital security measures employed by law firms were less robust than in many other industries, even though law firms are big targets for cybercriminals and government-backed hackers.The report indicated that law firms faced a high risk of cyberattacks due to the volume of incredibly valuable data they hold; data that could be used for insider trading or could be sold for big bucks on the black market. M&A data and patent applications were said to be the most highly prized information.Hackers are exploiting a wide range of security flaws in order to gain access to sensitive data; however, one of the main methods used is phishing. Social engineering techniques are used to get individuals in law firms to reveal login credentials to email accounts, to visit malicious websites that download malware, or open infected email attachments that directly install a host of malware on law firms’ networks.Many of the attacks are conducted by sending out random spam emails, although individuals within law firms are also being targeted with spear phishing emails. Individual employees are researched and targeted with carefully crafted emails to maximize the change of a response.The emails are written in native English and include investment and legal terminology. FireEye reported they can even contain detailed information about the inner workings of public companies.Unless law firm data security is improved, successful attacks will continue and client and corporate data will be exposed.Mar 17, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Mobile Security, Network Security |Security firms are reporting that some of the United States ransomware attacks conducted over the past few months have demonstrated a level of sophistication that suggest they are the work of hacking groups previously backed by the Chinese government.Ransomware attacks have previously been associated with low level cybercriminals who use spam email to send millions of messages out to random targets in the hope that some individuals will install the malicious file-locking software. In many cases, ransomware-as-a-service is being offered to cybercriminals via darknet marketplaces. Cybercriminals therefore do not need to have an extensive knowledge of hacking, and do not need to be highly skilled at conducting intrusions. However, due to the fact that ransomware can be incredibly lucrative, attacks are now being conducted by a wide range of individuals, including skilled hackers.In some cases, the tactics used in the attacks bear the hallmarks of hacking groups known to have previously been involved in state-sponsored attacks on U.S. companies. The ransomware may not have been developed by foreign-government-backed hackers, but the methods and software used to gain entry to company networks and move around certainly appears to be.Security firms Dell SecureWorks, InGuardians, G-C Partners, and Attack Research have all been called upon to investigate United States Ransomware attacks recently. The Dell team have investigated three highly sophisticated attacks, and the other companies have similarly been called upon to investigate security breaches involving ransomware.All of the companies have come to the conclusion that these attacks were not the work of run-of-the-mill cybercriminals, and believe a well-known Chinese hacking group was behind the attacks. In one case, an attack on a U.S. company resulted in over 100 computers being locked with the file-encrypting software. Another attack involved 30 computers being locked. Similar large-scale ransomware attacks have also been investigated by the security firms. These attacks, like many conducted on large U.S. companies, have not previously been reported.Some of the attacks took advantage of security vulnerabilities in application servers, other used login credentials that were obtained in past Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) attacks on U.S companies. Rather than APT attacks taking place for espionage, the same methods appear to be used to gain access to networks in order to install ransomware.None of the security firms are able to say with 100% certainty that the attacks were conducted by Chinese hacking groups, although it does appear to be the most logical answer. One theory put forward is that with China now pulling out of cyber-espionage after last year’s agreement with the U.S government, many Chinese hackers who were previously funded by the government are now out of work or are looking for additional income. Since the potential payoff from ransomware attacks is so high, they are now performing attacks on their own.In some cases, where U.S companies have been compromised by government-sponsored attacks, it has been hypothesized that the hackers are cashing in as they pull out.Even if Chinese hacking groups are not involved, it is clear is there is considerable money to be made by performing these attacks. Cybercriminal gangs who have previously targeted credit card numbers may now be switching to ransomware due to big potential payoffs.Since most companies do not declare that they have suffered an attack and paid a ransom, it is difficult to tell exactly how bad the current situation is. But until ransomware ceases to be profitable, United States ransomware attacks are likely to continue.Mar 16, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Network Security |Websites are being registered on Oman’s top level domain by typosqautters looking to capitalize on mistakes made by Mac users and push Genieo adware. The .om domain is intended to catch out Mac users who type quickly and miss out the c when typing .com website addresses.Typosquatting is the registration of domain names with transposed or missed letters in an attempt to cash in on traffic intended for other websites. Goole.com being a good example. The site has been registered and uses an Ask Jeeves search bar to provide search engine functions to bad typists. The website has been reported to attract 1000 visitors a day, the vast majority of which have mistyped google.com.However, in the case of the .om domain the typosquatters have sinister motives. The sites are being used to deliver malware and adware, with the typosquatters appearing to be targeting devices running OS X.The sites detect the operating system on the device and redirect Windows users to websites where they are bombarded with popup adverts. Mac users are targeted with a fake Adobe Flash update. Downloading the update will install Genieo adware. Genieo adware installs itself as a browser extension on Firefox, Opera, and Chrome and is used to serve ads.The spate of domain registrations was noticed by security researchers at Endgame, who discovered that over 330 domains had been registered with Oman’s Telecom Regulatory Authority in the past few weeks.As is common with malicious typosquatters, they have chosen the names of well-known websites that receive large volumes of traffic. Endgame reports that .om sites have been registered for Gmail, Macys, Citibank, and Dell in the past few weeks, along with a host of other well-known brands. The sites appear to have been registered by a number of different typosquatting groups not just one individual. However, a large percentage were found to have been registered by individuals in New Jersey.A number of different hosting companies have been used, although the site installations are all very similar. Endgame discovered that many of the sites contain vulnerabilities that could allow other parties to hijack the sites. At the present time, it would appear that the typosquatters are only intent on pushing Genieo adware and promote ad networks, although that may not remain the case. With the high number of security vulnerabilities that exist on the sites they could all too easily be hijacked by other individuals and used to deliver malware and ransomware to unsuspecting visitors.Mar 11, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Mobile Security, Web Filtering |Two new studies indicate the mobile malware threat is increasing at an unpresented rate. Any enterprise that allows smartphones to connect to its network, such as those operating a BYOD policy, faces an increased risk of a cyberattack via those devices.According to the recent G DATA survey, the mobile malware threat has increased substantially over the course of the past 12 months and shows no sign of abating. The number of new malware variants discovered in 2015 is 50% higher than 2014. In 2015, 2.3 million malware samples targeting Android devices were collected, with a new variant being identified, on average, every 11 seconds. In the final quarter of the year, an alarming 758,133 new malware samples were collected, which represents an increase of 32% from the third quarter.The main risk is older devices operating outdated versions of Android, although G DATA reports that hackers are developing exploits for security vulnerabilities far faster than in past years. Unless Android operating systems are kept totally up to date, vulnerabilities will exist that can be exploited. Unfortunately, phone manufacturers often delay rolling out operating system updates leaving all devices prone to attack.Earlier this month, a report issued by the Nokia Threat Intelligence Lab suggested that 60% of malware operating in the mobile space targets Android smartphones. While iOS malware was a rarity, that has now changed. Nokia reports that for the first time ever, iOS malware has made the top 20 malware list, which now includes the iOS Xcodeghost and FlexiSpy malware. These two malware account for 6% of global smartphone infections.Mobile ransomware is also increasing. In 2015, several new mobile ransomware variants were identified. Ransomware is used to lock devices with file-encrypting software. Users are only able to recover their files if a ransom is paid to the attackers. With an increasing number of individuals using their smartphones to store irreplaceable data, and many users not backing up those files, individuals are often given no choice but to pay attackers for a security key to unlock their data.Nokia reports that the malware now being identified has increased in sophistication and has been written by hackers that know the Android system inside out. Malware is getting harder to detect, and once identified it can be extremely difficult to remove. Nokia reports that many malware variants are highly persistent and can even survive a factory reset.With the mobile malware threat increasing, organizations must implement new security measures to keep devices secure and protect their networks. Anti-virus and anti-malware solutions should be installed on all devices allowed to connect to business networks to reduce the risk of a malware infection.Many mobile devices are used for work purposes such as accessing business email accounts. Android malware infections could all too easily result in business data being compromised, while keyloggers could give attackers access to business networks.Enterprises may not yet be majorly concerned about the rising mobile malware threat, but they should be. With the growing sophistication of today’s mobile malware, a business network compromise is a very real threat.Enterprises that permit the use of mobile devices for work purposes should limit the actions that can be performed on Wi-Fi networks by implementing a web filtering solution. They should ensure that all BYOD policies stipulate a minimum Android version that can be used, and all devices should be kept up to date with app updates installed promptly. Enterprises should also monitor for jailbroken or rooted devices, and prevent them from being used for work purposes or from connecting to business Wi-Fi networks.Mar 10, 2016 | Cybersecurity Advice, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Mobile Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |A new report issued by the Institute for Critical Infrastructure highlights the need for organizations to develop ransomware mitigation policies due to the high risk of cyberattacks involving the malicious file encrypting software. The report warns that 2016 will be a year when ransomware wreaks havoc on businesses in the United States, in particular on the U.S critical infrastructure community.Ransomware is being used by cybercriminals as it is a highly effective method of extorting money from businesses. Businesses need data in order to function, and ransomware prevents them from accessing it. If ransomware is installed on a computer, or worse still spreads to a computer network, critical data needed by the business is encrypted. A ransom demand is issued by the attackers who will not release the decryption keys until the ransom is paid. Without those keys data will remain locked forever. Business are often given no alternative but to give in to the attackers’ demands.The report warns organizations of the current dangers, and says that in 2016, “Ransomware is rampant.” Organizations of all sizes are being targeted. The criminal gangs behind the campaigns are targeting healthcare providers, even though their actions place the lives of patients in danger. Police and fire departments have also been targeted, as have educational institutions and businesses. The greater the need for access to data, the bigger incentive organizations have to pay the ransom.According to the report, “In numerous cases, organizations tend to pay because, for them, every minute of downtime directly equates to lost revenue.” The cost of that downtime can be considerable. Far more than the ransom demand in many cases.Unfortunately, as pointed out in the report, it is too difficult and time consuming to track down attackers. They are able to cover their tracks effectively and they take payment in Bitcoin or use other online payment methods that give them a degree of anonymity. Often attacks are conducted across International borders. This makes it simply too difficult for the perpetrators to be found and brought to justice by law enforcement agencies.Even the FBI has said that it advises companies to pay the ransom in many cases, unless the victims can live without their data. The report says, “no security vendor or law enforcement authority can help victims recover from these attacks.” It is therefore up to each individual organization to put measures in place to protect against ransomware.Recovering from a ransomware infection can be expensive and difficult. It is therefore imperative that defenses are put in place to prevent ransomware from being installed on computers and networks.The report suggests four key areas that can help with ransomware mitigation.An information security team should conduct risk assessments, identify vulnerabilities, and ensure defenses are shored up. Security holes must be plugged to prevent them being exploited. The team must also devise strategies to protect critical assets. They are an essential element of a ransomware mitigation strategy.Staff training is essential. Employees must be instructed how to identify threats. Employees are often targeted as they are the weakest link in the security chain. It is easiest to get an employee to install ransomware than to attempt a hack in many cases. According to the report, this is one of the most important ransomware mitigation steps to take.Layered defenses should be implemented to make it harder for attackers to succeed. Organizations should not rely on one form of defense such as a firewall.  Antivirus and antimalware solutions should be used, anti-spam filters employed to prevent email attacks, and web filtering solutions should be used to prevent web-borne attacks.With the threat now having reached critical levels, ransomware mitigation policies are essential. Administrative policies can help reduce the likelihood of an attack being successful. Employees must be aware who they can report suspicious emails and network activity to, and those individuals must be aware how they should act and deal with threats.Mar 8, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Network Security, Web Filtering |It was only a matter of time before a fully functional Mac ransomware was developed. Researchers at Palo Alto Networks have discovered that time has now come, after its Unit 42 team found KeRanger: The first fully functional Mac ransomware to be discovered in the wild. The ransomware was spread via the Transmission file-sharing app.Fortunately, action has been taken to contain the malicious software before it could be fully exploited; however, this signals a turning point for Apple users. Their devices are no longer safe from ransomware attacks.While a Mac ransomware called FileCoder was discovered by Kaspersky Lab in 2014, the malicious software was incomplete and could not be used to infect Apple devices. The discovery of KeRanger shows that Apple users are no longer immune to attack.Apple has added the signature for the malicious software to its XProtect OS X anti-malware definitions However, any Apple customer that downloaded BitTorrent client Transmission (v 2.9) over the weekend (Between 11:00 PST on March 4, and 19:00 PST on March 5, 2016) could well have downloaded KeRanger, along with any customer who downloaded the file sharing app prior to March 4.The Mac ransomware bypassed Gatekeeper controls by using a genuine security certificate. The certificate was issued to Polisan Boya Sanayi ve Ticaret A.Ş., of Istanbul and is believed to have been stolen.The ransomware was included in the Transmission installation files as “General.rtf.” The rich text file looks innocuous enough, but General.rtf is not a document file as the extension suggests, instead it is a Mach-O executable file. The file is copied to ~/Library/kernel_service and is run before the user sees an interface.Once the ransomware has been activated, it searches the system on which it is installed and will encrypt around 300 different file types, including images, documents, multimedia files, emails, databases, certificates, archives, and source code. The Mac ransomware uses AES encryption to lock any files it finds and is capable of encrypting files saved on connected networks and external drives.In many cases, ransomware infections cannot be removed and the user is forced to pay a ransom to obtain a security key. However, locked files can potentially be restored from backups. Unfortunately for users infected with KeRanger, the Time Machine system files are also encrypted preventing backup files from being restored.The new Mac ransomware has been neutralized by the revoking of the digital certificate that enables the software to install on OS X, while the developers of Transmission App have removed the infected version from the transmissionbt.com website.According to Claud Xiao of Palo Alto Networks, if KeRanger has been installed, users will still be at risk of having their files encrypted.  The latest version of Transmission will remove the ransomware if it has been installed on users’ Macs.Any customer who has installed version 2.9 should download the updated version of the file sharing software as soon as possible to prevent their device from being locked by the file-encrypting malware.Users only have a limited timeframe for doing this. The Mac ransomware will stay hidden and quiet for 3 days following infection. After that it will connect to its C&C and will start encrypting files on the infected device and connected drives. A ransom of 1 Bitcoin (around $400) will then be demanded by the attackers. Only if the ransom is paid will the security key be sent to unlock the encryption. Failure to pay will see files locked forever. Transmission users must ensure they have installed version 2.92 and need to reboot their device after installation.WebTitan Cloud can help enterprises keep their devices free from malware and ransomware by blocking the downloading of file types known to be used by hackers to install malicious software. It is also possible to prevent KeRanger installations by blocking access to file sharing websites. By limiting the actions that can be taken by users and the sites that can be visited, the risk of networks being compromised or infected with malware can be greatly reduced.WebTitan Cloud and WebTitan Gateway web filtering solutions can reduce reliance on staff training to teach end users how to identify malware, phishing emails, and malicious websites. Blocking risky online behavior can significantly reduce the risk of malware and ransomware infections.Mar 5, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Email & Web Spam, Internet Security |Phishing scams have increased significantly in the past few weeks as cybercriminals step up their campaigns during tax season, with many using a technique referred to as business email compromise to fool victims into sending employee W-2 form data to the attackers.Some organizations have thwarted attacks, but many have fallen for the phishing scams and have emailed highly sensitive employee data to the criminals behind the campaigns. Business email compromise is used in spear phishing campaigns: Highly targeted and highly convincing attacks on small numbers of employees within an organization.Most phishing campaigns are random. Emails are sent out by the million in the hope that some individuals will fall for the scams. The email campaigns are not particularly convincing and rely on greed or naiveté in many cases to attract a click or the disclosure of sensitive data.Business email compromise campaigns on the other hand are much more convincing. They tend to involve very carefully constructed emails, good grammar, do not contain the spelling mistakes common in most spam emails, and are hand written and sent to a very select number of individuals within an organization or to just one person. They are often personal, referring to the target by their first name. They also use business email addresses for the attack. An email sent from within the company, or seemly from within the company, is much more likely to be trusted.Corporate images are often used, email signatures copied, and the email address of the sender is spoofed. Victims are researched, as are the companies. The key to the success of these campaigns is their realism. The aim is to get an employee to take a specific action without thinking that the request is anything other than genuine. If the scam is successful, the victim may never know that they have been duped.The email requests, at first glance at least, appear to be genuine. They are sent from a senior executive or the CEO of the company. When they are sent from an authority figure from within the company the request is less likely to be questioned.In the past few weeks a number of companies have received business email compromise phishing emails and have sent attackers a list of employee W-2 form data, including Social Security numbers, dates of birth, names, and details of employee earnings for the year. These data can be used by the criminals to file false tax returns in the names of company employees.Magnolia Health Corporation recently announced one of its employees had fallen for a business email compromise scam and had sent a full list of employees to the attacker. The mistake was discovered, although not for a week. The attack took place on February 3, 2016.Also on February 3, Californian company BrightView also received a phishing email requesting employee data and sent information, as requested, to the email scammers. BrightView discovered the mistake the following day.Polycom, a content collaboration and communication technology also based in California, was attacked in the same manner on February 5, and also fell for the business email compromise scam. California-based Snapchat similarly was fooled by the business email compromise scam and emailed the data of 700 employees to the attackers. Mercy Housing Inc., and Central Concrete Supply Co., also suffered similar attacks recently.The attacks have not been limited to California. Alaskan Telecommunications company GCI also fell victim to a similar attack, which resulted in the data of 2,500 employees being sent to a scammer.BEC scams are convincing and employees need to be particularly vigilant especially at this time of year. To reduce the risk of a BEC attack being successful, it is important that staff receive training on how to identify a business email compromise scam. Policies should also be introduced to make it harder for employees to fall for the scams, such as requiring all data requests to be verified by two employees, one of whom should be within the Information Security team.Until tax season draws to a close we are likely to see even more companies fall for these scams.Mar 3, 2016 | Cybersecurity Advice, Internet Security, Network Security |According to a recent report issued by Pwnie Labs, wireless device security vulnerabilities are not being addressed by enterprises even though many wireless devices can be used as backdoors into corporate networks.If wireless printers and access points are not secured, hackers can easily use them to gain access to internal networks. Many organizations invest heavily in security defenses but forget to change the default configurations on their wireless printers. Pwnie Labs researchers ascertained that more than half of wireless devices (56%) used by enterprises are HP printers. When default settings are not changed, the devices can be used as a backdoor into corporate networks. HP printers were found to be the most commonly open wireless network, while 35% of wireless access points either did not use encryption or security defenses were found to be particularly weak.Plugging wireless device security vulnerabilities is not always straightforward. Organizations need to change the default password on the devices, yet many do not do so because it causes connectivity problems. However, if wireless device security vulnerabilities are not addressed they could allow hackers to bypass an organization’s security defenses and gain access to internal networks.A recent survey conducted on 400 IT security professionals showed that 55% of respondents had already witnessed a cyberattack via wireless devices. 86% said that they were concerned about wireless device security vulnerabilities.Pwnie Labs found that many wireless printers are left with default settings active, although some do not even have a username and password set allowing anyone to connect. If the wireless printer is hardwired to an Ethernet network, gaining access to the printer via Wi-Fi could allow a hacker to also gain access to the network to which the printer is connected.The devices are designed to make connection as easy as possible, and this feature can all too easily be exploited by attackers. If an attacker sets up a malicious access point and used the same SSID as that used by the manufacturer to configure the printer, the printer could automatically connect to that network.To prevent this, remove open wireless networks from the preferred network list on the printer. Alternatively, ensure that the printer does not automatically connect to open wireless networks.If a wireless printer is used as a network printer via an Ethernet connection, it is essential to disable Wi-Fi functionality to prevent the device from being used as a wireless bridge to the wired network. If there is no need for a wireless printer to be hardwired to a network, ensure that it isn’t and use strong encryption to connect wirelessly to the device.Printers are not the only devices that can be used in this fashion. All devices with wireless functionality must be subjected to a full risk assessment. If wireless networks are not used by an organization, devices with wireless capability must have the function disabled. If wireless networks are in use, all devices must be carefully configured to reduce the risk of attack.Feb 25, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Data Breach News, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Network Security, Web Filtering |Last year saw a massive increase in the number of recorded enterprise malware attacks, with hackers also targeting public sector organizations and government agencies with increased frequency. According to the new Dell Security Annual Threat Report, malware attacks virtually doubled in 2015, and reached a staggering 8.19 billion worldwide infections.The new report makes for worrying reading. The current threat level is greater than ever before and the volume of enterprise malware attacks now taking place has reached unprecedented levels. Organizations that fail to implement robust controls to protect their systems from malware downloads are likely to be attacked.To compile the report, Dell gathered data from its Dell SonicWALL Global Response Intelligence Defense network. In 2014, Dell SonicWALL received approximately 37 million unique malware samples. In 2015, that figure increased to 64 million: An increase of 73%. Dell noted increases in malware, ransomware, viruses, Trojans, worms, and botnets in 2015.Not only is the volume of malware increasing, the vectors used to infect devices and networks are now much broader. Cybercriminals are also getting much better at concealing infections and covering their tracks. When malware is eventually discovered on systems, it has usually been present and active for some time.Hackers are now using anti-forensic techniques to evade detection, steganography, URL pattern changes, and are modifying their landing page entrapment techniques. Command and Control center communications are also being encrypted making it harder to identify communications from infected devices and systems. Oftentimes, it is communications between malware and C&C servers that allow anti-malware and intrusion prevention systems to identify malware infections.Spam email is still being used to deliver malicious software although drive-by attacks have increased. IoT devices are also being used to install malware due to the relatively poor security of the devices.Enterprises now have a much broader attack surface to defend, yet security budgets are often stretched making it difficult for IT security teams to install adequate defenses to repel attacks using such a diverse range of attack vectors. It may not be possible to implement robust defenses to repel all attacks, although by concentrating on the most commonly exploited weaknesses the majority of enterprise malware attacks can easily be prevented.The majority of successful enterprise malware attacks could have been prevented had basic security measures been implemented and had industry security best practices been adopted. Hackers may be using ever more sophisticated methods to infiltrate systems and steal data, but in the majority of cases they do not use zero-day vulnerabilities to attack: Well-known security weaknesses are exploited.All too often enterprise malware attacks are discovered to have occurred as a result of unpatched or outdated software. Oftentimes, patches and software updates have been available for months prior to attacks taking place. One of the best defenses against cyberattacks is to adopt good patch management practices and ensure that software updates are applied within days of release.Email spam is still used to deliver a wide range of malware and malicious software, yet spam email is easy to block with a robust spam filtering solution such as SpamTitan. Along with staff training on phishing email identification and basic security best practices, malware infections via email can be easily prevented.It is also strongly advisable to implement an enterprise web filtering solution. Allowing employees full access to the Internet can leave a business susceptible to drive-by malware downloads. A web filtering solution such as WebTitan Gateway – or WebTitan Cloud for Wi-Fi networks – can prevent malicious file downloads, malvertising, and limit the risk of drive-by enterprise malware attacks.Using a firewall capable of inspecting every packet and validating all entitlements for access is also advisable. Since hackers are also using SSL/TLS encryption to mask C&C communications, it is a wise precaution to use a firewall that incorporates SSL-DPI inspection functionality.Feb 24, 2016 | Cybersecurity Advice, Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Malware Alerts, Network Security, Web Filtering |Locky ransomware is a new threat believed to emanate from the hacking team behind Dridex malware. The new threat is being delivered via spam email and is disguised as a Microsoft Word invoice. If macros are enabled, or if the macro contained in the infected Word file is run, a script will download Locky ransomware: A 32-bit executable file containing a dropper. That dropped malware will run from the %TEMP% folder and will disguise itself as svchost.exe.Locky ransomware will search for files stored on the infected device and will rename them and add the extension locky. The renamed files cannot be identified by the user. They are given a unique file ID along with a unique ID for each user. Files are locked using RSA-2048 and AES-128 ciphers and all communication between Locky and its command and control server are encrypted.Once files have been encrypted, a text file will be saved to the desktop detailing the actions that must be taken by the victim in order to restore their files. A bitmap containing the instructions is also set as the user’s wallpaper.Links are supplied which the user must access via the Tor network and further instructions unique to that user are detailed on a unique webpage for each user. Users are instructed how to buy Bitcoin and how to send the ransom of 0.5 to 1.0 Bitcoin (around $200-$400) to the attackers. Upon paying the ransom the victim will receive a security key which will enable them to unlock their files. Locky ransomware encrypts data stored on local drives, removable media, and ramdisks, although it is also capable of encrypting data on network resources.Locky ransomware can only be installed if a malicious macro contained in the Word file is run. Opening the infected Word document will not result in the device or network being infected until macros have been enabled. If this happens, the Word document macro will save a file to the device (Troj/Ransom-CGX) which will act as a downloader and will install the ransomware payload.Once downloaded the payload will start to encrypt a wide range of files. Those files include documents, multimedia files, images, office files, and source code. Shadow copies (VSS files) on the device will also be removed. Even the wallet.dat file is encrypted, leaving Bitcoin users no alternative but to pay the ransom. The ransomware will encrypt files on any connected or mounted drive, and will lock files regardless of the operating system used.Any user logged in with administrator privileges when Locky ransomware strikes will see a considerable amount of damage caused, leaving them no alternative but to pay the ransom to unlock files. Bear in mind that the above ransom amounts have been seen for individual users. There is no telling what ransom will be demanded if a business user is infected.There are a number of ways that businesses can protect their networks from a Locky ransomware attack. The first is to prevent the malicious word document from being delivered.       Feb 22, 2016 | Email & Web Spam, Internet Security, Web Filtering |The failure to use a school web filter could result in children gaining access to hardcore pornography in the classroom. If a school web filter is used, it is essential to ensure that it is configured correctly. Two Canadian parents have just discovered that porn is still accessible via classroom computers after conducting a simple test at their daughters’ school.In this case, the Internet could only be accessed at the elementary school in Markham, Ontario, using a valid account and Internet access is supervised, so the chance of children viewing adult content is limited. That said, if children want to view porn they would not be prevented from doing so.  The software solution that had been put in place did not block pornography and other adult content from being displayed.After gaining permission to use her daughter’s Internet login, Eva Himanen conducted a simple search on Google to see whether it was possible for images of an adult nature to be viewed in the classroom. She did this by typing the search terms “porn” and “naked sex” into Google.Rather than images and search listings being blocked, the search brought up numerous thumbnail images of exactly the material one would expect such as search to produce.  There were also listings of a wide range of porn websites that had not been blocked. A school web filter was allegedly in place, but images were still displayed.Access to the Internet is controlled by logins and parents and children are required to sign an acceptable use form each year. However, while students may agree not to search for adult website content, that does not prevent them from viewing inappropriate material.If a child was able to access pornographic images without being spotted by a teacher, it is likely that the Internet use would be discovered. Logs of all websites visited are maintained by the school and are regularly checked. Any websites of an adult nature that are accessed would be tied to an individual child’s login and action would be taken again that individual. However, the damage would have already been done. If one student was to perform such a search and break the rules, other children’s may also be affected.Blocking access to certain sections of the Internet is straightforward with WebTitan. WebTitan’s school web filter is quick and easy to implement and can offer protection in a matter of minutes. It is possible to block websites by category as well as by keyword term, and blacklists can be uploaded easily.One of the problems that can occur with a school web filter is the overblocking of website content. It is possible that blocking a particular category of website, or a specific keyword term such as “sex”, would result in some website content being blocked incorrectly. This could potentially prevent individuals from accessing sexual education material, some of which may be required under the curriculum.A web filter may therefore require a certain degree of fine tuning. False positives will always occur with any web filter, although careful implementation and choice of keyword terms and website categories will keep this to a minimum, while ensuring that harmful content is blocked. Using a flexible, and easy to use school web filter such as WebTitan will make this as straightforward as possible.WebTitan’s web filtering solutions for schools have a high degree of granularity, allowing potentially harmful content to be easily filtered, while ensuring that valuable educational material is still displayed. It is still important to have allowable use policies in place, but should a student attempt to break the rules, they would still be prevented from viewing adult content, and their actions would be logged to allow action to be taken.For further information on the full range of features of WebTitan’s school web filtering solutions, contact the sales team today for advice.US Sales +1 585 973 5080UK/EU Sales +44 (0)247 699 3641IRL +353 91 54 55 00or email us at info@webtitan.comFeb 20, 2016 | Cybersecurity News, Email & Web Spam, Industry News, Internet Security, Mobile Security, Network Security, Web Filtering |The healthcare ransomware threat is not new, but the threat of attack is growing. Last week, a healthcare provider in the United States found out just how damaging a ransomware attack can be. Hollywood Presbyterian Hospital experienced a ransomware attack on February 5, resulting in part of its computer network being taken out of action for more than a week.The healthcare provider’s electronic health record system (EHR) was locked by ransomware and a demand of $17,000 was made by the attackers to supply the security keys. This is not the first time that a healthcare provider has had to deal with a ransomware infection, but attacks on healthcare organizations have been relatively rare.What makes this attack stand out is the fact that the ransom was actually paid. CEO Allen Stefanek said “The quickest and most efficient way to restore our systems and administrative functions was to pay the ransom.”Many businesses in the country have been attacked and have been forced to pay sizable ransoms in order to get a security key to decrypt their locked data. If data is encrypted by attackers, and no backup exists, there is little choice but to pay the ransom and hope that the attackers make good on their promise to supply the security keys.There is no guarantee that the attackers will pay of course. They could just demand even more money. There have also been cases where the attackers have “tweaked” their ransomware, but accidentally broke it in the process. Even if a ransom was paid, it would not be possible to unlock the data.Paying a ransom does not therefore guarantee that the security keys will be supplied. In this case, the attackers did make good on their promise and supplied the keys allowing business to return to normal.The public announcement about the ransomware attack, and the disclosure of the payment of the $17,000 ransom, could potentially lead to even more attacks taking place. That is a big payment for a hacker, yet orchestrating a ransomware campaign is relatively easy, and does not require a major financial outlay. The return on investment will be significant if a healthcare provider is forced to pay a ransom. Since the ransom was paid, this may prompt many more hackers to attack healthcare providers.This attack does raise a number of questions. What many security professionals will be asking is why the hospital paid at all. In the United States, healthcare providers are required to make backups and store those data off-site. In event of emergency, such as this, a healthcare provider must be able to restore patient data. This is a requirement of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). It doesn’t matter what the emergency is, if computers or networks are taken out of action, the protected health information of patients cannot be lost.The reality however, is that restoring computer systems after a ransomware attack may not be quite as straightforward. It would depend on the extent of the ransomware attack, the number of systems that were compromised, the difficulty of restoring data, and how much data would actually be lost.Backups should be performed daily, so it is possible that 24 hours of data may have been lost, but unlikely any more. Even if data loss had occurred, it is probably that the data were stored elsewhere and could be recovered. The payment of the ransom suggests that there may have actually been an issue with the backups, or that the cost of recovering data from the backups would have been more than the cost of paying the ransom.Regardless of the reasons why data restoration was not possible, or paying the ransom seemed preferable, other healthcare providers should be concerned. Further attacks are likely to take place, so it is essential that backups are performed regularly, and critically, those backups are tested. A backup of data that cannot be restored is not a backup. It is a false hope.Furthermore, healthcare providers must ensure employees are trained how to spot a malware and ransomware, and software solutions should be implemented to prevent spam emails from being delivered to inboxes. Staff should be prepared, but it is best not to put the malware identification skills to the test.Not all ransomware is delivered via spam email. Additional protections must also be put in place to prevent drive-by attacks and malvertising should be blocked. A web filtering solution, such as WebTitan, should also be installed to reduce the risk of ransomware downloads and to enforce safe use of the Internet.There is no silver bullet that can totally negate the healthcare ransomware threat. It is impossible to make any system 100% secure, but by implementing a range of protections the risk of a ransomware infection can be reduced to an acceptable level. A disaster recovery plan must also exist that will allow data to be restored in the event that an attack does prove to be successful.Feb 19, 2016 | Cybersecurity Advice, Cybersecurity News, Internet Security, Network Security |In recent months, concern has been growing over the lack of medical equipment cybersecurity protections in place at hospitals and medical centers. Healthcare providers are being targeted by cybercriminals for the confidential data they store on patients. Medical devices, and their associated computer hardware, could potentially be targeted by cybercriminals. Medical device security is often overlooked by health IT professionals, and the manufacturers of the devices often fail to make their equipment secure.Healthcare providers store Social Security numbers, health insurance data, financial information, and the personal information of patients. These data have a high value on the black market as they can be used by criminals to commit identity theft and a multitude of fraud.Cyberattacks on hospitals and health insurers are increasing, and while cybersecurity protections as a whole are improving, the industry still lags behind other industry sectors when it comes to implementing robust cybersecurity protections. Numerous security vulnerabilities are often allowed to exist, making it relatively easy for hackers to take advantage.Medical equipment cybersecurity is particularly lax. The devices may not provide easy access to the types of data sought by identity thieves in some cases, but they are networked. If access is gained, attacks on other parts of a healthcare network could take place.If hackers are able to gain access to a medical device a considerable amount of harm could be caused. A malicious hacker could alter or delete data, crash the device, or steal data stored on the device or the computer connected to it.  If settings can be altered patients could be seriously harmed. Doses of medication could be altered or medical diagnoses or test results changed, with disastrous consequences for the patient.Expensive equipment could be sabotaged or the devices could be locked with ransomware. The ransomware infection of Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center this month shows that the threat of malware is very real. In fact, attacks on hospitals can be very lucrative for hackers. The hospital recently paid $17,000 for security keys to unlock its EHR system after a ransomware infection took it out of action.So how bad are medical equipment cybersecurity protections? Recently, Sergey Lozhkin of Kaspersky Lab decided to find out. He recently announced the results of his attempts to hack medical devices at the 2016 Security Analyst Summit (SAS 2016) in Tenerife.Lozhkin set out to hack a hospital and succeeded in doing just that by exploiting a lack of medical device cybersecurity protections at a hospital. The hack started with a search using the Shodan search engine. Lozhkin discovered a number of hospital devices and contacted the owner. Along with his friend, he decided to conduct a penetration test to see just how easy it was to gain access to the devices. The senior managers of the hospital were aware of the test and secured real data to prevent any unauthorized disclosure or data loss as a result of the test.The first attempt at hacking the medical devices failed. The hospital’s systems administrator had done a good job of securing systems from external attack. However, the second attempt at hacking was successful. Lozhkin decided that instead of attacking from home, he would travel to the hospital and try to attack from within. However, physical access to the hospital was not necessary. He was able to hack the hospital from his car, since he could park outside and gain access to the hospital’s local Wi-Fi network.Once he hacked the network key he was able to gain access to a tomographic scanner. By exploiting a vulnerability in an application he gained access to the file system of the device and was able to view (fake) patient data. The real data had been secured prior to the test. In this case, the hack was possible because the hospital’s systems administrator had made a fundamental mistake, having connected a medical device to the hospital’s public WiFi network.If medical equipment cybersecurity protections are insufficient, it may be hacktivists or data thieves that gain access to data rather than pen testers. Hospitals must ensure that medical equipment cybersecurity protections are put in place, but security must also be tested to ensure cybersecurity defenses actually prevent access to medical devices and the sensitive data they contain.Better medical equipment cybersecurity protections must also be incorporated into the design of medical devices by the manufacturers to make sure medical equipment is harder to hack.
